---
title: Acid Base Reactions
description: |
  How?
tags:
  - Chemistry
---

## Weak acid &ndash; strong base

Acid disassociation is incomplete.

$$
\text{H}A(aq) + \text{H}_2\text{O}(l) \rightleftharpoons A^{-}(aq) + \text{H}_3\text{O}^{+}(aq)
$$

Base association is complete.

$$
B^{-}(aq) + \text{H}_2\text{O}(l) \rightarrow \text{H}B(aq) + \text{OH}^{-}(aq)
$$

Hydroxide anions from base association associate with hydronium from acid disassociation.

$$
\text{H}_3\text{O}^{+}(aq) + \text{OH}^{-}(aq) \rightarrow 2\text{H}_2\text{O}(l)
$$

This reduces hydronium concentration, which drives forward reaction in acid disassociation due to Le Chatelier's principle, forcing complete disassociation of acid. So overall:

$$
\text{H}A(aq) + B^{-}(aq) \rightarrow \text{H}B(aq) + A^{-}(aq)
$$

The conjugate base of the weak acid ($A^{-}$) is likely weak, but strong enough to produce some hydroxide anions, and so &hellip;

$$
A^{-}(aq) + \text{H}_2\text{O}(l) \rightleftharpoons \text{H}A(aq) + \text{OH}^{-}(aq)
$$

Which will mean that the resulting solution is basic. I would expect the $K_b$ of the conjugate base, and the initial concentration of the weak acid, to determine the pH of the solution at the equivalence point.

## Strong acid &ndash; strong base

All the above also applies, except there's no need for the forward reaction in the disassociation to be forced. It's complete anyway.

$$
\text{H}A(aq) + \text{H}_2\text{O}(l) \rightarrow A^{-}(aq) + \text{H}_3\text{O}^{+}(aq)
$$

The overall reaction is the same.

$$
\text{H}A(aq) + B^{-}(aq) \rightarrow \text{H}B(aq) + A^{-}(aq)
$$

But now the conjugate base ($A^{-}$) will be extremely weak, so the solution will be neutral.
