bradparker.com/usr/local/src/bradparker.com/site/content/posts/2025-06-02-books-badgers-and-big-numbers.md, before:

---
title: Books, Badgers and Big Numbers
tags:
  - mathematics
  - books
description: |
  TBD
---

I stumbled into what might be some combinatorial esoterica and I can't stop thinking about it.

## Books

Up until April 2023 we had a pretty special second hand book shop up the road, next to the local café[^1]. While it was there my mid morning coffee runs usually involved having a browse and I often picked something up.

<ul class="list-none grid grid-cols-2 grid-rows-2 gap-3">
  <li>

  ![The cover the book Chaos by James Gleick](/content/posts/books-badgers-and-big-numbers/assets/images/finds/chaos.webp)

  </li>
  <li>

  ![The cover the book Linear Algebra and Its Applications by Gilbert Strang](/content/posts/books-badgers-and-big-numbers/assets/images/finds/linear-algebra-and-its-applications.webp)

  </li>
  <li>

  ![The cover of the book The Wonderful World of Steam Locomotives by P. B. Whitehouse](/content/posts/books-badgers-and-big-numbers/assets/images/finds/the-wonderful-world-of-steam-locomotives.webp)

  </li>
  <li>

  ![The cover of the book Dancing With Cats by Burton Silver and Heather Busch](/content/posts/books-badgers-and-big-numbers/assets/images/finds/dancing-with-cats.webp)

  </li>
</ul>

A lot of the books I was buying were non-fiction, and it's this I'd like to blame on my over-thinking their organisation. I wanted everything grouped by subject, rather than author or title or year or anything like that. So in the end I signed up for a [LibraryThing](https://www.librarything.com) account and used their codes to sort everything.

## Badgers

Some time last year LibraryThing let me know they'd made me a Year In Review. You know, like Spotify does. It's not really my jam, but I clicked through anyway and ended up reading this sentence:

> And make sure your floors will support the added weight of 4.90 adult badgers!

I'd scanned in all our books at once, so this doesn't represent how many books we added to our collection in 2024, but rather the whole lot. At any rate, now whenever I look at our bookshelves I find myself trying to imagine five adult badgers somehow sitting in them. Which is hard, given that I have no idea how big an adult badger is.

## Big Numbers

Despite the badgers, it's not all that many books really. But even still I felt the need to choose _some_ sort of order. Now, without worrying about the usefulness of any particular arrangement, I wonder how many options there really are? How many ways could I have arranged these books?

In [my last post](/posts/crossing-paths-with-descartes) I talked about enumerating possibilities, but in all the examples I used I permitted every possible option. Nothing was excluded, even if two coin tosses or dice throws resulted in the same outcome I still counted them as a unique possibility. What I was talking about there were Cartesian Products. That is: given a set of options $A$ and a set of options $B$ the total range of possibilities of combing both is $A \times B$, the Cartesian Product of sets $A$ and $B$.

<figure class="wide">

$$
\begin{align*}
A &= \{1, 2, 3\} \\
B &= \{a, b, c\} \\
A \times B &= \begin{Bmatrix}
  (1, a) & (1, b) & (1, c) \\
  (2, a) & (2, b) & (2, c) \\
  (3, a) & (3, b) & (3, c)
\end{Bmatrix}
\end{align*}
$$

</figure>

The total number of possibilities is the number of each input set of possibilities multiplied together.

<figure class="wide">

$$
\begin{align*}
|A| &= 3 \\
|B| &= 3 \\
|A \times B|
  &= |A| \times |B| \\
  &= 9
\end{align*}
$$

</figure>

What if we imagine that arrangements are the same as combined sets of possibilities? That we choose an element (any element) from $A$ _No. of elements in $A$_ times (AKA $|A|$ times). We might then say that the total number of arrangements for some collection of things, $A$, is $|A^{|A|}|$.

<figure class="wide">

$$
\mathit{\text{No. arrangements of } A} = \overbrace{|A| \times |A| \times ... \times |A|}^{|A|}
$$

</figure>

More concretely.

<figure class="wide">

$$
\begin{align*}
A &= \{1, 2, 3\} \\
A^{|A|}
  &= A \times A \times A \\
  &= \begin{Bmatrix}
    (1, 1, 1) & (1, 1, 2) & (1, 1, 3) \\
    (1, 2, 1) & (1, 2, 2) & (1, 2, 3) \\
    (1, 3, 1) & (1, 3, 2) & (1, 3, 3) \\
    (2, 1, 1) & (2, 1, 2) & (2, 1, 3) \\
    (2, 2, 1) & (2, 2, 2) & (2, 2, 3) \\
    (2, 3, 1) & (2, 3, 2) & (2, 3, 3) \\
    (3, 1, 1) & (3, 1, 2) & (3, 1, 3) \\
    (3, 2, 1) & (3, 2, 2) & (3, 2, 3) \\
    (3, 3, 1) & (3, 3, 2) & (3, 3, 3)
  \end{Bmatrix} \\
|A^{|A|}|
  &= |A| \times |A| \times |A| \\
  &= 27
\end{align*}
$$

</figure>

But we know that's not right. There are many things in there which aren't really _arrangements_. Arranging a collection won't duplicate any of its elements, so things like $(1, 1, 1)$ and $(3, 2, 2)$ shouldn't be counted.

What we need is a method to count arrangements that accounts for elements being used only once. Because that's how we might lay out an arrangement of some collection. We'd select an item to start with, then select the next item from what's left, then the next from what's left, and so on until we've placed every item and run out of options to select from.

For example, given the following collection of items.

![The letters, 'a', 'b' and 'c'](/content/posts/books-badgers-and-big-numbers/assets/images/permutations/abc-large.webp)

We could arrange them like so.

| Step | Options | Selection | Result |
|:----:|-------------------|--------|--------|
| <span class="founders-grotesk">1</span> | ![The letters 'a', 'b' and 'c'](/content/posts/books-badgers-and-big-numbers/assets/images/permutations/abc.webp) | ![The letter 'b'](/content/posts/books-badgers-and-big-numbers/assets/images/permutations/b.webp) | ![The letter 'b'](/content/posts/books-badgers-and-big-numbers/assets/images/permutations/b.webp) |
| <span class="founders-grotesk">2</span> | ![The letters 'a' and 'c'](/content/posts/books-badgers-and-big-numbers/assets/images/permutations/ac.webp) | ![The letter 'a'](/content/posts/books-badgers-and-big-numbers/assets/images/permutations/a.webp) | ![The letter 'b'](/content/posts/books-badgers-and-big-numbers/assets/images/permutations/ba.webp) |
| <span class="founders-grotesk">3</span> | ![The letter  'c'](/content/posts/books-badgers-and-big-numbers/assets/images/permutations/c.webp) | ![The letter 'c'](/content/posts/books-badgers-and-big-numbers/assets/images/permutations/c.webp) | ![The letter 'b'](/content/posts/books-badgers-and-big-numbers/assets/images/permutations/bac.webp) |

At each step the set of options reduces by one. Once 'b' is put down, only 'a' and 'c' are left. On the next step once 'a' is put down only 'c' is left. So, in general, rather than this.

<figure class="wide">

$$
\mathit{\text{No. arrangements of } A} = \overbrace{|A| \times |A| \times ... \times |A|}^{|A|}
$$

</figure>

What we have instead is this.

<figure class="wide">

$$
\mathit{\text{No. arrangements of } A} = |A| \times (|A| - 1) \times (|A| - 2) ... \times 1
$$

</figure>

For the 'a', 'b', 'c' example then we'd have.

<figure class="wide">

$$
\begin{align*}
A &= \{a, b, c\} \\
\mathit{\text{No. arrangements of } A}
  &= |A| \times (|A| - 1) \times 1 \\
  &= 3 \times 2 \times 1 \\
  &= 6
\end{align*}
$$

</figure>

And here they all are.

<ul class="list-none grid grid-cols-3 grid-rows-2 gap-3">
  <li>
    <img alt="The letters 'a', 'b' and 'c'" src="/content/posts/books-badgers-and-big-numbers/assets/images/permutations/abc.webp" />
  </li>
  <li>
    <img alt="The letters 'a', 'c' and 'b'" src="/content/posts/books-badgers-and-big-numbers/assets/images/permutations/acb.webp" />
  </li>
  <li>
    <img alt="The letters 'b', 'a' and 'c'" src="/content/posts/books-badgers-and-big-numbers/assets/images/permutations/bac.webp" />
  </li>
  <li>
    <img alt="The letters 'b', 'c' and 'a'" src="/content/posts/books-badgers-and-big-numbers/assets/images/permutations/bca.webp" />
  </li>
  <li>
    <img alt="The letters 'c', 'a' and 'b'" src="/content/posts/books-badgers-and-big-numbers/assets/images/permutations/cab.webp" />
  </li>
  <li>
    <img alt="The letters 'c', 'b' and 'a'"src="/content/posts/books-badgers-and-big-numbers/assets/images/permutations/cba.webp" />
  </li>
</ul>

The result you get from multiplying all the numbers less than some number is called the _factorial_ of that number. It's written like this.

<figure class="wide">

$$
!n = n \times (n - 1) \times (n - 2) \times ... \times 2 \times 1
$$

</figure>

Right now we've got 419 books which can be sorted by a code. So how many ways could I have arranged them? What's the factorial of 419?

<figure class="wide">

$$
419 \times 418 \times 417 \times ... \times 3 \times 2 \times 1
$$

</figure>

It's this extremely large number.

2,<wbr/>908,<wbr/>421,<wbr/>057,<wbr/>896,<wbr/>340,<wbr/>474,<wbr/>361,<wbr/>403,<wbr/>432,<wbr/>093,<wbr/>534,<wbr/>061,<wbr/>335,<wbr/>411,<wbr/>576,<wbr/>803,<wbr/>237,<wbr/>495,<wbr/>067,<wbr/>620,<wbr/>711,<wbr/>879,<wbr/>592,<wbr/>887,<wbr/>139,<wbr/>553,<wbr/>095,<wbr/>110,<wbr/>943,<wbr/>225,<wbr/>026,<wbr/>262,<wbr/>406,<wbr/>188,<wbr/>778,<wbr/>320,<wbr/>680,<wbr/>189,<wbr/>451,<wbr/>711,<wbr/>755,<wbr/>153,<wbr/>962,<wbr/>269,<wbr/>093,<wbr/>225,<wbr/>791,<wbr/>463,<wbr/>391,<wbr/>282,<wbr/>309,<wbr/>784,<wbr/>673,<wbr/>974,<wbr/>891,<wbr/>888,<wbr/>521,<wbr/>144,<wbr/>472,<wbr/>954,<wbr/>435,<wbr/>530,<wbr/>212,<wbr/>518,<wbr/>938,<wbr/>132,<wbr/>427,<wbr/>719,<wbr/>386,<wbr/>733,<wbr/>483,<wbr/>011,<wbr/>170,<wbr/>577,<wbr/>979,<wbr/>186,<wbr/>407,<wbr/>238,<wbr/>784,<wbr/>514,<wbr/>071,<wbr/>038,<wbr/>335,<wbr/>200,<wbr/>586,<wbr/>427,<wbr/>023,<wbr/>669,<wbr/>168,<wbr/>853,<wbr/>348,<wbr/>715,<wbr/>855,<wbr/>934,<wbr/>206,<wbr/>590,<wbr/>666,<wbr/>886,<wbr/>642,<wbr/>210,<wbr/>446,<wbr/>229,<wbr/>488,<wbr/>444,<wbr/>697,<wbr/>075,<wbr/>683,<wbr/>231,<wbr/>304,<wbr/>763,<wbr/>674,<wbr/>216,<wbr/>898,<wbr/>857,<wbr/>425,<wbr/>205,<wbr/>633,<wbr/>114,<wbr/>990,<wbr/>510,<wbr/>459,<wbr/>902,<wbr/>307,<wbr/>876,<wbr/>760,<wbr/>425,<wbr/>583,<wbr/>148,<wbr/>615,<wbr/>724,<wbr/>632,<wbr/>751,<wbr/>661,<wbr/>133,<wbr/>203,<wbr/>237,<wbr/>905,<wbr/>432,<wbr/>668,<wbr/>028,<wbr/>736,<wbr/>816,<wbr/>553,<wbr/>087,<wbr/>322,<wbr/>961,<wbr/>245,<wbr/>249,<wbr/>766,<wbr/>243,<wbr/>189,<wbr/>634,<wbr/>620,<wbr/>342,<wbr/>650,<wbr/>104,<wbr/>310,<wbr/>228,<wbr/>160,<wbr/>720,<wbr/>464,<wbr/>432,<wbr/>084,<wbr/>583,<wbr/>406,<wbr/>587,<wbr/>932,<wbr/>793,<wbr/>842,<wbr/>882,<wbr/>817,<wbr/>312,<wbr/>083,<wbr/>420,<wbr/>305,<wbr/>011,<wbr/>614,<wbr/>174,<wbr/>094,<wbr/>373,<wbr/>347,<wbr/>653,<wbr/>327,<wbr/>314,<wbr/>151,<wbr/>733,<wbr/>173,<wbr/>716,<wbr/>990,<wbr/>349,<wbr/>453,<wbr/>642,<wbr/>618,<wbr/>332,<wbr/>498,<wbr/>813,<wbr/>131,<wbr/>703,<wbr/>848,<wbr/>734,<wbr/>139,<wbr/>461,<wbr/>889,<wbr/>356,<wbr/>833,<wbr/>404,<wbr/>468,<wbr/>988,<wbr/>162,<wbr/>294,<wbr/>586,<wbr/>549,<wbr/>217,<wbr/>704,<wbr/>913,<wbr/>958,<wbr/>653,<wbr/>349,<wbr/>142,<wbr/>669,<wbr/>023,<wbr/>627,<wbr/>237,<wbr/>073,<wbr/>393,<wbr/>370,<wbr/>291,<wbr/>667,<wbr/>739,<wbr/>306,<wbr/>611,<wbr/>350,<wbr/>729,<wbr/>516,<wbr/>327,<wbr/>327,<wbr/>902,<wbr/>034,<wbr/>218,<wbr/>650,<wbr/>157,<wbr/>031,<wbr/>351,<wbr/>111,<wbr/>738,<wbr/>938,<wbr/>367,<wbr/>328,<wbr/>649,<wbr/>342,<wbr/>699,<wbr/>827,<wbr/>177,<wbr/>333,<wbr/>219,<wbr/>328,<wbr/>746,<wbr/>468,<wbr/>751,<wbr/>048,<wbr/>295,<wbr/>766,<wbr/>233,<wbr/>367,<wbr/>259,<wbr/>458,<wbr/>382,<wbr/>317,<wbr/>867,<wbr/>840,<wbr/>592,<wbr/>639,<wbr/>000,<wbr/>000,<wbr/>000,<wbr/>000,<wbr/>000,<wbr/>000,<wbr/>000,<wbr/>000,<wbr/>000,<wbr/>000,<wbr/>000,<wbr/>000,<wbr/>000,<wbr/>000,<wbr/>000,<wbr/>000,<wbr/>000,<wbr/>000,<wbr/>000,<wbr/>000,<wbr/>000,<wbr/>000,<wbr/>000,<wbr/>000,<wbr/>000,<wbr/>000,<wbr/>000,<wbr/>000,<wbr/>000,<wbr/>000,<wbr/>000,<wbr/>000,<wbr/>000,<wbr/>000.

And here's the kind of question that led to my current cosy combinatorial corner: given a sorted list of all possible arrangements, what is the (_deep breath_) 2,<wbr/>844,<wbr/>113,<wbr/>050,<wbr/>416,<wbr/>543,<wbr/>052,<wbr/>622,<wbr/>601,<wbr/>377,<wbr/>724,<wbr/>177,<wbr/>730,<wbr/>794,<wbr/>635,<wbr/>580,<wbr/>558,<wbr/>165,<wbr/>101,<wbr/>289,<wbr/>087,<wbr/>907,<wbr/>211,<wbr/>046,<wbr/>617,<wbr/>413,<wbr/>162,<wbr/>202,<wbr/>727,<wbr/>992,<wbr/>682,<wbr/>826,<wbr/>505,<wbr/>610,<wbr/>602,<wbr/>434,<wbr/>122,<wbr/>752,<wbr/>894,<wbr/>055,<wbr/>956,<wbr/>478,<wbr/>001,<wbr/>246,<wbr/>987,<wbr/>975,<wbr/>654,<wbr/>867,<wbr/>880,<wbr/>927,<wbr/>440,<wbr/>389,<wbr/>088,<wbr/>878,<wbr/>653,<wbr/>260,<wbr/>211,<wbr/>539,<wbr/>374,<wbr/>415,<wbr/>866,<wbr/>208,<wbr/>792,<wbr/>187,<wbr/>943,<wbr/>989,<wbr/>161,<wbr/>515,<wbr/>680,<wbr/>780,<wbr/>226,<wbr/>637,<wbr/>325,<wbr/>041,<wbr/>170,<wbr/>571,<wbr/>521,<wbr/>944,<wbr/>136,<wbr/>857,<wbr/>756,<wbr/>357,<wbr/>610,<wbr/>408,<wbr/>690,<wbr/>480,<wbr/>987,<wbr/>642,<wbr/>359,<wbr/>289,<wbr/>070,<wbr/>142,<wbr/>617,<wbr/>861,<wbr/>100,<wbr/>311,<wbr/>817,<wbr/>255,<wbr/>304,<wbr/>659,<wbr/>710,<wbr/>866,<wbr/>175,<wbr/>534,<wbr/>883,<wbr/>866,<wbr/>241,<wbr/>789,<wbr/>715,<wbr/>155,<wbr/>834,<wbr/>223,<wbr/>460,<wbr/>969,<wbr/>127,<wbr/>343,<wbr/>122,<wbr/>506,<wbr/>553,<wbr/>271,<wbr/>818,<wbr/>293,<wbr/>567,<wbr/>727,<wbr/>306,<wbr/>529,<wbr/>166,<wbr/>052,<wbr/>023,<wbr/>268,<wbr/>045,<wbr/>186,<wbr/>141,<wbr/>937,<wbr/>347,<wbr/>041,<wbr/>818,<wbr/>966,<wbr/>122,<wbr/>038,<wbr/>640,<wbr/>793,<wbr/>796,<wbr/>799,<wbr/>685,<wbr/>516,<wbr/>455,<wbr/>929,<wbr/>549,<wbr/>507,<wbr/>013,<wbr/>186,<wbr/>833,<wbr/>430,<wbr/>265,<wbr/>450,<wbr/>466,<wbr/>044,<wbr/>505,<wbr/>744,<wbr/>178,<wbr/>793,<wbr/>393,<wbr/>254,<wbr/>499,<wbr/>311,<wbr/>497,<wbr/>130,<wbr/>361,<wbr/>821,<wbr/>989,<wbr/>719,<wbr/>697,<wbr/>224,<wbr/>981,<wbr/>301,<wbr/>053,<wbr/>842,<wbr/>088,<wbr/>290,<wbr/>183,<wbr/>796,<wbr/>995,<wbr/>774,<wbr/>643,<wbr/>108,<wbr/>623,<wbr/>128,<wbr/>572,<wbr/>424,<wbr/>596,<wbr/>295,<wbr/>207,<wbr/>864,<wbr/>719,<wbr/>379,<wbr/>479,<wbr/>419,<wbr/>093,<wbr/>894,<wbr/>525,<wbr/>035,<wbr/>709,<wbr/>405,<wbr/>252,<wbr/>305,<wbr/>572,<wbr/>483,<wbr/>849,<wbr/>439,<wbr/>595,<wbr/>150,<wbr/>582,<wbr/>362,<wbr/>925,<wbr/>993,<wbr/>365,<wbr/>553,<wbr/>189,<wbr/>173,<wbr/>069,<wbr/>073,<wbr/>069,<wbr/>239,<wbr/>396,<wbr/>792,<wbr/>666,<wbr/>051,<wbr/>139,<wbr/>882,<wbr/>098,<wbr/>736,<wbr/>318,<wbr/>227,<wbr/>488,<wbr/>496,<wbr/>884,<wbr/>365,<wbr/>414,<wbr/>402,<wbr/>236,<wbr/>391,<wbr/>348,<wbr/>245,<wbr/>541,<wbr/>096,<wbr/>370,<wbr/>960,<wbr/>228,<wbr/>964,<wbr/>587,<wbr/>593,<wbr/>160,<wbr/>349,<wbr/>264,<wbr/>902,<wbr/>263,<wbr/>727,<wbr/>302,<wbr/>169,<wbr/>421,<wbr/>863,<wbr/>892,<wbr/>154,<wbr/>866,<wbr/>370,<wbr/>306,<wbr/>041,<wbr/>614,<wbr/>127,<wbr/>727,<wbr/>830,<wbr/>967,<wbr/>236,<wbr/>995,<wbr/>581,<wbr/>667,<wbr/>801,<wbr/>392,<wbr/>480,<wbr/>447,<wbr/>679,<wbr/>422,<wbr/>359,<wbr/>386,<wbr/>205,<wbr/>525,<wbr/>674,<wbr/>979,<wbr/>615,<wbr/>059,<wbr/>536,<wbr/>733,<wbr/>032,<wbr/>646,<wbr/>807,<wbr/>296,<wbr/>164,<wbr/>119,<wbr/>104,<wbr/>440,<wbr/>573,<wbr/>184,<wbr/>560,<wbr/>777,<wbr/>118,<wbr/>241st one? You know &hellip; for example.

## Lexicographic ordering

How might arrangements be sorted? To answer that I need to define when one arrangement should come before another. Here's a scheme.

* Step through pairs of elements from both arrangements. I.E. First look at the first element of arrangement $x$ and the first element from arrangement $y$, then the second element from arrangement $x$ and the second element from arrangement $y$, and so on.
* For the first pair with mismatching elements, if the element from $x$ should come before the element from $y$ then the whole arrangement $x$ should come before the arrangement $y$.

For example, here's two arrangements of the first three letters of the alphabet.

<figure class="wide">

$$
\begin{align*}
  x &= (\text{`b'}, \text{`c'}, \text{`a'}) \\
  y &= (\text{`b'}, \text{`a'}, \text{`c'})
\end{align*}
$$

</figure>

1. Compare the first element of each ordering: $x_1 = \text{`b'}$ and $y_1 = \text{`b'}$. They match, so move onto the next pair of elements.
2. Compare the second element of each ordering: $x_2 = \text{`c'}$ and $y_2 = \text{`a'}$. They don't match and $\text{`a'}$ comes before $\text{`b'}$, therefore $y$ comes before $x$.

This is the [_Lexicographic order_](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lexicographic_order), and it might seem like the way mostly everything is sorted in day to day life &hellip; because it is! This is how we sort words in the dictionary, hence the name.

## Enumeration and indexing

The example above sorts arrangements with reference to a pre-existing ordering of their elements: the alphabet. But it didn't _have_ to. We could've used some other ordering and then got a different result. For example we could live in an alternate timeline where the Latin alphabet begins $(\text{`c'}, \text{`a'}, \text{`b'})$ rather than $(\text{`a'}, \text{`b'}, \text{`c'})$. In that case the order of our example arrangements would be reversed and $x$ would come before $y$.

The alphabet we have is one possible arrangement. One of 403,<wbr/>291,<wbr/>461,<wbr/>126,<wbr/>605,<wbr/>635,<wbr/>584,<wbr/>000,<wbr/>000 options in fact. To reduce confusion when talking about any alternative, unintuitive, arrangements we can choose to ignore the specific elements of whatever collection we're arranging and instead refer only to their position in some selected _default_ ordering. The alphabet is the chosen default for letters, where 'a' is first, 'b' is second, 'c' is third, and so on. We can then discuss other arrangements by saying only where elements 1, 2, and 3 are. For example, the arrangement $(\text{`b'}, \text{`a'}, \text{`c'})$ becomes $(2, 1, 3)$.

For our book collection I'll treat alphabetical by title as the default arrangement with which I'll compare others.

## Lehmer codes

Now for the meat of the matter.

&hellip;

[^1]: We were very sad to see Logical Unsanity close. The ABC did a nice feature at the time: [_Quirky tin shed bookshop 'born out of laziness' offers booklovers' sanctuary_](https://www.abc.net.au/news/2018-04-08/quirky-tin-shed-bookshop-offers-booklovers-sanctuary-brisbane/9618992)

Commit message:

Just have to put some text there really...

bradparker.com/usr/local/src/bradparker.com/site/content/posts/2025-06-02-books-badgers-and-big-numbers.md, after:

---
title: Books, Badgers and Big Numbers
tags:
  - mathematics
  - books
description: |
  TBD
---

I stumbled into what might be some combinatorial esoterica and I can't stop thinking about it.

## Books

Up until April 2023 we had a pretty special second hand book shop up the road, next to the local café[^1]. While it was there my mid morning coffee runs usually involved having a browse and I often picked something up.

<ul class="list-none grid grid-cols-2 grid-rows-2 gap-3">
  <li>

  ![The cover the book Chaos by James Gleick](/content/posts/books-badgers-and-big-numbers/assets/images/finds/chaos.webp)

  </li>
  <li>

  ![The cover the book Linear Algebra and Its Applications by Gilbert Strang](/content/posts/books-badgers-and-big-numbers/assets/images/finds/linear-algebra-and-its-applications.webp)

  </li>
  <li>

  ![The cover of the book The Wonderful World of Steam Locomotives by P. B. Whitehouse](/content/posts/books-badgers-and-big-numbers/assets/images/finds/the-wonderful-world-of-steam-locomotives.webp)

  </li>
  <li>

  ![The cover of the book Dancing With Cats by Burton Silver and Heather Busch](/content/posts/books-badgers-and-big-numbers/assets/images/finds/dancing-with-cats.webp)

  </li>
</ul>

A lot of the books I was buying were non-fiction, and it's this I'd like to blame on my over-thinking their organisation. I wanted everything grouped by subject, rather than author or title or year or anything like that. So in the end I signed up for a [LibraryThing](https://www.librarything.com) account and used their codes to sort everything.

## Badgers

Some time last year LibraryThing let me know they'd made me a Year In Review. You know, like Spotify does. It's not really my jam, but I clicked through anyway and ended up reading this sentence:

> And make sure your floors will support the added weight of 4.90 adult badgers!

I'd scanned in all our books at once, so this doesn't represent how many books we added to our collection in 2024, but rather the whole lot. At any rate, now whenever I look at our bookshelves I find myself trying to imagine five adult badgers somehow sitting in them. Which is hard, given that I have no idea how big an adult badger is.

## Big Numbers

Despite the badgers, it's not all that many books really. But even still I felt the need to choose _some_ sort of order. Now, without worrying about the usefulness of any particular arrangement, I wonder how many options there really are? How many ways could I have arranged these books?

In [my last post](/posts/crossing-paths-with-descartes) I talked about enumerating possibilities, but in all the examples I used I permitted every possible option. Nothing was excluded, even if two coin tosses or dice throws resulted in the same outcome I still counted them as a unique possibility. What I was talking about there were Cartesian Products. That is: given a set of options $A$ and a set of options $B$ the total range of possibilities of combing both is $A \times B$, the Cartesian Product of sets $A$ and $B$.

<figure class="wide">

$$
\begin{align*}
A &= \{1, 2, 3\} \\
B &= \{a, b, c\} \\
A \times B &= \begin{Bmatrix}
  (1, a) & (1, b) & (1, c) \\
  (2, a) & (2, b) & (2, c) \\
  (3, a) & (3, b) & (3, c)
\end{Bmatrix}
\end{align*}
$$

</figure>

The total number of possibilities is the number of each input set of possibilities multiplied together.

<figure class="wide">

$$
\begin{align*}
|A| &= 3 \\
|B| &= 3 \\
|A \times B|
  &= |A| \times |B| \\
  &= 9
\end{align*}
$$

</figure>

What if we imagine that arrangements are the same as combined sets of possibilities? That we choose an element (any element) from $A$ _No. of elements in $A$_ times (AKA $|A|$ times). We might then say that the total number of arrangements for some collection of things, $A$, is $|A^{|A|}|$.

<figure class="wide">

$$
\mathit{\text{No. arrangements of } A} = \overbrace{|A| \times |A| \times ... \times |A|}^{|A|}
$$

</figure>

More concretely.

<figure class="wide">

$$
\begin{align*}
A &= \{1, 2, 3\} \\
A^{|A|}
  &= A \times A \times A \\
  &= \begin{Bmatrix}
    (1, 1, 1) & (1, 1, 2) & (1, 1, 3) \\
    (1, 2, 1) & (1, 2, 2) & (1, 2, 3) \\
    (1, 3, 1) & (1, 3, 2) & (1, 3, 3) \\
    (2, 1, 1) & (2, 1, 2) & (2, 1, 3) \\
    (2, 2, 1) & (2, 2, 2) & (2, 2, 3) \\
    (2, 3, 1) & (2, 3, 2) & (2, 3, 3) \\
    (3, 1, 1) & (3, 1, 2) & (3, 1, 3) \\
    (3, 2, 1) & (3, 2, 2) & (3, 2, 3) \\
    (3, 3, 1) & (3, 3, 2) & (3, 3, 3)
  \end{Bmatrix} \\
|A^{|A|}|
  &= |A| \times |A| \times |A| \\
  &= 27
\end{align*}
$$

</figure>

But we know that's not right. There are many things in there which aren't really _arrangements_. Arranging a collection won't duplicate any of its elements, so things like $(1, 1, 1)$ and $(3, 2, 2)$ shouldn't be counted.

What we need is a method to count arrangements that accounts for elements being used only once. Because that's how we might lay out an arrangement of some collection. We'd select an item to start with, then select the next item from what's left, then the next from what's left, and so on until we've placed every item and run out of options to select from.

For example, given the following collection of items.

![The letters, 'a', 'b' and 'c'](/content/posts/books-badgers-and-big-numbers/assets/images/permutations/abc-large.webp)

We could arrange them like so.

| Step | Options | Selection | Result |
|:----:|-------------------|--------|--------|
| <span class="founders-grotesk">1</span> | ![The letters 'a', 'b' and 'c'](/content/posts/books-badgers-and-big-numbers/assets/images/permutations/abc.webp) | ![The letter 'b'](/content/posts/books-badgers-and-big-numbers/assets/images/permutations/b.webp) | ![The letter 'b'](/content/posts/books-badgers-and-big-numbers/assets/images/permutations/b.webp) |
| <span class="founders-grotesk">2</span> | ![The letters 'a' and 'c'](/content/posts/books-badgers-and-big-numbers/assets/images/permutations/ac.webp) | ![The letter 'a'](/content/posts/books-badgers-and-big-numbers/assets/images/permutations/a.webp) | ![The letter 'b'](/content/posts/books-badgers-and-big-numbers/assets/images/permutations/ba.webp) |
| <span class="founders-grotesk">3</span> | ![The letter  'c'](/content/posts/books-badgers-and-big-numbers/assets/images/permutations/c.webp) | ![The letter 'c'](/content/posts/books-badgers-and-big-numbers/assets/images/permutations/c.webp) | ![The letter 'b'](/content/posts/books-badgers-and-big-numbers/assets/images/permutations/bac.webp) |

At each step the set of options reduces by one. Once 'b' is put down, only 'a' and 'c' are left. On the next step once 'a' is put down only 'c' is left. So, in general, rather than this.

<figure class="wide">

$$
\mathit{\text{No. arrangements of } A} = \overbrace{|A| \times |A| \times ... \times |A|}^{|A|}
$$

</figure>

What we have instead is this.

<figure class="wide">

$$
\mathit{\text{No. arrangements of } A} = |A| \times (|A| - 1) \times (|A| - 2) ... \times 1
$$

</figure>

For the 'a', 'b', 'c' example then we'd have.

<figure class="wide">

$$
\begin{align*}
A &= \{a, b, c\} \\
\mathit{\text{No. arrangements of } A}
  &= |A| \times (|A| - 1) \times 1 \\
  &= 3 \times 2 \times 1 \\
  &= 6
\end{align*}
$$

</figure>

And here they all are.

<ul class="list-none grid grid-cols-3 grid-rows-2 gap-3">
  <li>
    <img alt="The letters 'a', 'b' and 'c'" src="/content/posts/books-badgers-and-big-numbers/assets/images/permutations/abc.webp" />
  </li>
  <li>
    <img alt="The letters 'a', 'c' and 'b'" src="/content/posts/books-badgers-and-big-numbers/assets/images/permutations/acb.webp" />
  </li>
  <li>
    <img alt="The letters 'b', 'a' and 'c'" src="/content/posts/books-badgers-and-big-numbers/assets/images/permutations/bac.webp" />
  </li>
  <li>
    <img alt="The letters 'b', 'c' and 'a'" src="/content/posts/books-badgers-and-big-numbers/assets/images/permutations/bca.webp" />
  </li>
  <li>
    <img alt="The letters 'c', 'a' and 'b'" src="/content/posts/books-badgers-and-big-numbers/assets/images/permutations/cab.webp" />
  </li>
  <li>
    <img alt="The letters 'c', 'b' and 'a'"src="/content/posts/books-badgers-and-big-numbers/assets/images/permutations/cba.webp" />
  </li>
</ul>

The result you get from multiplying all the numbers less than some number is called the _factorial_ of that number. It's written like this.

<figure class="wide">

$$
n! = n \times (n - 1) \times (n - 2) \times ... \times 2 \times 1
$$

</figure>

Right now we've got 419 books which can be sorted by a code. So how many ways could I have arranged them? What's the factorial of 419?

<figure class="wide">

$$
419 \times 418 \times 417 \times ... \times 3 \times 2 \times 1
$$

</figure>

It's this extremely large number.

2,<wbr/>908,<wbr/>421,<wbr/>057,<wbr/>896,<wbr/>340,<wbr/>474,<wbr/>361,<wbr/>403,<wbr/>432,<wbr/>093,<wbr/>534,<wbr/>061,<wbr/>335,<wbr/>411,<wbr/>576,<wbr/>803,<wbr/>237,<wbr/>495,<wbr/>067,<wbr/>620,<wbr/>711,<wbr/>879,<wbr/>592,<wbr/>887,<wbr/>139,<wbr/>553,<wbr/>095,<wbr/>110,<wbr/>943,<wbr/>225,<wbr/>026,<wbr/>262,<wbr/>406,<wbr/>188,<wbr/>778,<wbr/>320,<wbr/>680,<wbr/>189,<wbr/>451,<wbr/>711,<wbr/>755,<wbr/>153,<wbr/>962,<wbr/>269,<wbr/>093,<wbr/>225,<wbr/>791,<wbr/>463,<wbr/>391,<wbr/>282,<wbr/>309,<wbr/>784,<wbr/>673,<wbr/>974,<wbr/>891,<wbr/>888,<wbr/>521,<wbr/>144,<wbr/>472,<wbr/>954,<wbr/>435,<wbr/>530,<wbr/>212,<wbr/>518,<wbr/>938,<wbr/>132,<wbr/>427,<wbr/>719,<wbr/>386,<wbr/>733,<wbr/>483,<wbr/>011,<wbr/>170,<wbr/>577,<wbr/>979,<wbr/>186,<wbr/>407,<wbr/>238,<wbr/>784,<wbr/>514,<wbr/>071,<wbr/>038,<wbr/>335,<wbr/>200,<wbr/>586,<wbr/>427,<wbr/>023,<wbr/>669,<wbr/>168,<wbr/>853,<wbr/>348,<wbr/>715,<wbr/>855,<wbr/>934,<wbr/>206,<wbr/>590,<wbr/>666,<wbr/>886,<wbr/>642,<wbr/>210,<wbr/>446,<wbr/>229,<wbr/>488,<wbr/>444,<wbr/>697,<wbr/>075,<wbr/>683,<wbr/>231,<wbr/>304,<wbr/>763,<wbr/>674,<wbr/>216,<wbr/>898,<wbr/>857,<wbr/>425,<wbr/>205,<wbr/>633,<wbr/>114,<wbr/>990,<wbr/>510,<wbr/>459,<wbr/>902,<wbr/>307,<wbr/>876,<wbr/>760,<wbr/>425,<wbr/>583,<wbr/>148,<wbr/>615,<wbr/>724,<wbr/>632,<wbr/>751,<wbr/>661,<wbr/>133,<wbr/>203,<wbr/>237,<wbr/>905,<wbr/>432,<wbr/>668,<wbr/>028,<wbr/>736,<wbr/>816,<wbr/>553,<wbr/>087,<wbr/>322,<wbr/>961,<wbr/>245,<wbr/>249,<wbr/>766,<wbr/>243,<wbr/>189,<wbr/>634,<wbr/>620,<wbr/>342,<wbr/>650,<wbr/>104,<wbr/>310,<wbr/>228,<wbr/>160,<wbr/>720,<wbr/>464,<wbr/>432,<wbr/>084,<wbr/>583,<wbr/>406,<wbr/>587,<wbr/>932,<wbr/>793,<wbr/>842,<wbr/>882,<wbr/>817,<wbr/>312,<wbr/>083,<wbr/>420,<wbr/>305,<wbr/>011,<wbr/>614,<wbr/>174,<wbr/>094,<wbr/>373,<wbr/>347,<wbr/>653,<wbr/>327,<wbr/>314,<wbr/>151,<wbr/>733,<wbr/>173,<wbr/>716,<wbr/>990,<wbr/>349,<wbr/>453,<wbr/>642,<wbr/>618,<wbr/>332,<wbr/>498,<wbr/>813,<wbr/>131,<wbr/>703,<wbr/>848,<wbr/>734,<wbr/>139,<wbr/>461,<wbr/>889,<wbr/>356,<wbr/>833,<wbr/>404,<wbr/>468,<wbr/>988,<wbr/>162,<wbr/>294,<wbr/>586,<wbr/>549,<wbr/>217,<wbr/>704,<wbr/>913,<wbr/>958,<wbr/>653,<wbr/>349,<wbr/>142,<wbr/>669,<wbr/>023,<wbr/>627,<wbr/>237,<wbr/>073,<wbr/>393,<wbr/>370,<wbr/>291,<wbr/>667,<wbr/>739,<wbr/>306,<wbr/>611,<wbr/>350,<wbr/>729,<wbr/>516,<wbr/>327,<wbr/>327,<wbr/>902,<wbr/>034,<wbr/>218,<wbr/>650,<wbr/>157,<wbr/>031,<wbr/>351,<wbr/>111,<wbr/>738,<wbr/>938,<wbr/>367,<wbr/>328,<wbr/>649,<wbr/>342,<wbr/>699,<wbr/>827,<wbr/>177,<wbr/>333,<wbr/>219,<wbr/>328,<wbr/>746,<wbr/>468,<wbr/>751,<wbr/>048,<wbr/>295,<wbr/>766,<wbr/>233,<wbr/>367,<wbr/>259,<wbr/>458,<wbr/>382,<wbr/>317,<wbr/>867,<wbr/>840,<wbr/>592,<wbr/>639,<wbr/>000,<wbr/>000,<wbr/>000,<wbr/>000,<wbr/>000,<wbr/>000,<wbr/>000,<wbr/>000,<wbr/>000,<wbr/>000,<wbr/>000,<wbr/>000,<wbr/>000,<wbr/>000,<wbr/>000,<wbr/>000,<wbr/>000,<wbr/>000,<wbr/>000,<wbr/>000,<wbr/>000,<wbr/>000,<wbr/>000,<wbr/>000,<wbr/>000,<wbr/>000,<wbr/>000,<wbr/>000,<wbr/>000,<wbr/>000,<wbr/>000,<wbr/>000,<wbr/>000,<wbr/>000.

And here's the kind of question that led to my current cosy combinatorial corner: given a sorted list of all possible arrangements, what is the (_deep breath_) 2,<wbr/>844,<wbr/>113,<wbr/>050,<wbr/>416,<wbr/>543,<wbr/>052,<wbr/>622,<wbr/>601,<wbr/>377,<wbr/>724,<wbr/>177,<wbr/>730,<wbr/>794,<wbr/>635,<wbr/>580,<wbr/>558,<wbr/>165,<wbr/>101,<wbr/>289,<wbr/>087,<wbr/>907,<wbr/>211,<wbr/>046,<wbr/>617,<wbr/>413,<wbr/>162,<wbr/>202,<wbr/>727,<wbr/>992,<wbr/>682,<wbr/>826,<wbr/>505,<wbr/>610,<wbr/>602,<wbr/>434,<wbr/>122,<wbr/>752,<wbr/>894,<wbr/>055,<wbr/>956,<wbr/>478,<wbr/>001,<wbr/>246,<wbr/>987,<wbr/>975,<wbr/>654,<wbr/>867,<wbr/>880,<wbr/>927,<wbr/>440,<wbr/>389,<wbr/>088,<wbr/>878,<wbr/>653,<wbr/>260,<wbr/>211,<wbr/>539,<wbr/>374,<wbr/>415,<wbr/>866,<wbr/>208,<wbr/>792,<wbr/>187,<wbr/>943,<wbr/>989,<wbr/>161,<wbr/>515,<wbr/>680,<wbr/>780,<wbr/>226,<wbr/>637,<wbr/>325,<wbr/>041,<wbr/>170,<wbr/>571,<wbr/>521,<wbr/>944,<wbr/>136,<wbr/>857,<wbr/>756,<wbr/>357,<wbr/>610,<wbr/>408,<wbr/>690,<wbr/>480,<wbr/>987,<wbr/>642,<wbr/>359,<wbr/>289,<wbr/>070,<wbr/>142,<wbr/>617,<wbr/>861,<wbr/>100,<wbr/>311,<wbr/>817,<wbr/>255,<wbr/>304,<wbr/>659,<wbr/>710,<wbr/>866,<wbr/>175,<wbr/>534,<wbr/>883,<wbr/>866,<wbr/>241,<wbr/>789,<wbr/>715,<wbr/>155,<wbr/>834,<wbr/>223,<wbr/>460,<wbr/>969,<wbr/>127,<wbr/>343,<wbr/>122,<wbr/>506,<wbr/>553,<wbr/>271,<wbr/>818,<wbr/>293,<wbr/>567,<wbr/>727,<wbr/>306,<wbr/>529,<wbr/>166,<wbr/>052,<wbr/>023,<wbr/>268,<wbr/>045,<wbr/>186,<wbr/>141,<wbr/>937,<wbr/>347,<wbr/>041,<wbr/>818,<wbr/>966,<wbr/>122,<wbr/>038,<wbr/>640,<wbr/>793,<wbr/>796,<wbr/>799,<wbr/>685,<wbr/>516,<wbr/>455,<wbr/>929,<wbr/>549,<wbr/>507,<wbr/>013,<wbr/>186,<wbr/>833,<wbr/>430,<wbr/>265,<wbr/>450,<wbr/>466,<wbr/>044,<wbr/>505,<wbr/>744,<wbr/>178,<wbr/>793,<wbr/>393,<wbr/>254,<wbr/>499,<wbr/>311,<wbr/>497,<wbr/>130,<wbr/>361,<wbr/>821,<wbr/>989,<wbr/>719,<wbr/>697,<wbr/>224,<wbr/>981,<wbr/>301,<wbr/>053,<wbr/>842,<wbr/>088,<wbr/>290,<wbr/>183,<wbr/>796,<wbr/>995,<wbr/>774,<wbr/>643,<wbr/>108,<wbr/>623,<wbr/>128,<wbr/>572,<wbr/>424,<wbr/>596,<wbr/>295,<wbr/>207,<wbr/>864,<wbr/>719,<wbr/>379,<wbr/>479,<wbr/>419,<wbr/>093,<wbr/>894,<wbr/>525,<wbr/>035,<wbr/>709,<wbr/>405,<wbr/>252,<wbr/>305,<wbr/>572,<wbr/>483,<wbr/>849,<wbr/>439,<wbr/>595,<wbr/>150,<wbr/>582,<wbr/>362,<wbr/>925,<wbr/>993,<wbr/>365,<wbr/>553,<wbr/>189,<wbr/>173,<wbr/>069,<wbr/>073,<wbr/>069,<wbr/>239,<wbr/>396,<wbr/>792,<wbr/>666,<wbr/>051,<wbr/>139,<wbr/>882,<wbr/>098,<wbr/>736,<wbr/>318,<wbr/>227,<wbr/>488,<wbr/>496,<wbr/>884,<wbr/>365,<wbr/>414,<wbr/>402,<wbr/>236,<wbr/>391,<wbr/>348,<wbr/>245,<wbr/>541,<wbr/>096,<wbr/>370,<wbr/>960,<wbr/>228,<wbr/>964,<wbr/>587,<wbr/>593,<wbr/>160,<wbr/>349,<wbr/>264,<wbr/>902,<wbr/>263,<wbr/>727,<wbr/>302,<wbr/>169,<wbr/>421,<wbr/>863,<wbr/>892,<wbr/>154,<wbr/>866,<wbr/>370,<wbr/>306,<wbr/>041,<wbr/>614,<wbr/>127,<wbr/>727,<wbr/>830,<wbr/>967,<wbr/>236,<wbr/>995,<wbr/>581,<wbr/>667,<wbr/>801,<wbr/>392,<wbr/>480,<wbr/>447,<wbr/>679,<wbr/>422,<wbr/>359,<wbr/>386,<wbr/>205,<wbr/>525,<wbr/>674,<wbr/>979,<wbr/>615,<wbr/>059,<wbr/>536,<wbr/>733,<wbr/>032,<wbr/>646,<wbr/>807,<wbr/>296,<wbr/>164,<wbr/>119,<wbr/>104,<wbr/>440,<wbr/>573,<wbr/>184,<wbr/>560,<wbr/>777,<wbr/>118,<wbr/>241st one? You know &hellip; for example.

## Lexicographic ordering

How might arrangements be sorted? To answer that I need to define when one arrangement should come before another. Here's a scheme.

* Step through pairs of elements from both arrangements. I.E. First look at the first element of arrangement $x$ and the first element from arrangement $y$, then the second element from arrangement $x$ and the second element from arrangement $y$, and so on.
* For the first pair with mismatching elements, if the element from $x$ should come before the element from $y$ then the whole arrangement $x$ should come before the arrangement $y$.

For example, here's two arrangements of the first three letters of the alphabet.

<figure class="wide">

$$
\begin{align*}
  x &= (\text{`b'}, \text{`c'}, \text{`a'}) \\
  y &= (\text{`b'}, \text{`a'}, \text{`c'})
\end{align*}
$$

</figure>

1. Compare the first element of each ordering: $x_1 = \text{`b'}$ and $y_1 = \text{`b'}$. They match, so move onto the next pair of elements.
2. Compare the second element of each ordering: $x_2 = \text{`c'}$ and $y_2 = \text{`a'}$. They don't match and $\text{`a'}$ comes before $\text{`b'}$, therefore $y$ comes before $x$.

This is the [_Lexicographic order_](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lexicographic_order), and it might seem like the way mostly everything is sorted in day to day life &hellip; because it is! This is how we sort words in the dictionary, hence the name.

## Enumeration and indexing

The example above sorts arrangements with reference to a pre-existing ordering of their elements: the alphabet. But it didn't _have_ to. We could've used some other ordering and then got a different result. For example we could live in an alternate timeline where the Latin alphabet begins $(\text{`c'}, \text{`a'}, \text{`b'})$ rather than $(\text{`a'}, \text{`b'}, \text{`c'})$. In that case the order of our example arrangements would be reversed and $x$ would come before $y$.

The alphabet we have is one possible arrangement. One of 403,<wbr/>291,<wbr/>461,<wbr/>126,<wbr/>605,<wbr/>635,<wbr/>584,<wbr/>000,<wbr/>000 options in fact. To reduce confusion when talking about any alternative, unintuitive, arrangements we can choose to ignore the specific elements of whatever collection we're arranging and instead refer only to their position in some selected _default_ ordering. The alphabet is the chosen default for letters, where 'a' is first, 'b' is second, 'c' is third, and so on. We can then discuss other arrangements by saying only where elements 1, 2, and 3 are. For example, the arrangement $(\text{`b'}, \text{`a'}, \text{`c'})$ becomes $(2, 1, 3)$.

When we can use a sequence of numbers to refer to all the elements of a collection we're able to say that the collection is _indexed_ by those numbers. The numbers _point to_ elements in the collection.

For our book collection I'll treat alphabetical by title as the default arrangement with which I'll compare others.

## Lehmer codes

Right, here we go: Lehmer codes index the lexicographically ordered list of all possible arrangements of some collection of elements.

&hellip;

[^1]: We were very sad to see Logical Unsanity close. The ABC did a nice feature at the time: [_Quirky tin shed bookshop 'born out of laziness' offers booklovers' sanctuary_](https://www.abc.net.au/news/2018-04-08/quirky-tin-shed-bookshop-offers-booklovers-sanctuary-brisbane/9618992)
