site/content/about.md, before:

I live in Brisbane, Australia with my partner [Alicia](https://www.instagram.com/thecorrectalicia/) and very small dog Quintin (pictured).

![Quintin](/assets/images/quintin.jpg)

These days I mostly make [software](/tags/development.html), for a while I mostly [designed](/tags/design.html) things and prior to both I mostly played music.

I've been making software professionally for about seven years and I really love it. I believe software has this empowering potential, I believe everyone should be able to understand it if they want to. This means I prefer open and accessible tools and standards wherever possible. It also means I try to learn in the open, sharing what I learn as I learn it.

I can be found in some of the usual online places, say g'day if you have any questions about anything you've seen here.

* [twitter/\@parkerbrads](https://mobile.twitter.com/@parkerbrads)
* [github/bradparker](https://github.com/bradparker)
* [toot.cafe/\@brad](https://toot.cafe/@brad)
* [linkedin/brad-parker-40488456](https://www.linkedin.com/in/brad-parker-40488456/)

Commit message:

Add link to resume in about

site/content/about.md, after:

I live in Brisbane, Australia with my partner [Alicia](https://www.instagram.com/thecorrectalicia/) and very small dog Quintin (pictured).

![Quintin](/assets/images/quintin.jpg)

These days I mostly make [software](/tags/development.html), for a while I mostly [designed](/tags/design.html) things and prior to both I mostly played music.

I've been making software professionally for about seven years and I really love it. I believe software has this empowering potential, I believe everyone should be able to understand it if they want to. This means I prefer open and accessible tools and standards wherever possible. It also means I try to learn in the open, sharing what I learn as I learn it. If you'd like to know more about my history in this area you can read my [resume](/content/resume.html).

I can be found in some of the usual online places, say g'day if you have any questions about anything you've seen here.

* [twitter/\@parkerbrads](https://mobile.twitter.com/@parkerbrads)
* [github/bradparker](https://github.com/bradparker)
* [toot.cafe/\@brad](https://toot.cafe/@brad)
* [linkedin/brad-parker-40488456](https://www.linkedin.com/in/brad-parker-40488456/)
