content/posts/2019-08-10-servant-types.md, before:

---
title: Servant's type-level domain specific language
tags: development
summary: |
  Haskell has some _very_ interesting type-level features, Servant is a great case-study in how they can be used to build a practical and feature rich library. This post walks through an example in an attempt to become more familiar with its inner workings.

  ```haskell
  type UsersIndex =
    Get '[JSON] [User]

  type UsersShow =
    Capture "username" String
      :> Get '[JSON] (Maybe User)

  type Users =
    "users"
      :> (UsersIndex :<|> UsersShow)
  ```
---

I was shown [Servant](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/servant) by a friend of mine a few years ago. It's fair to say that, initially, I was overwhelmed. Haskell was a new language to me however one of the things that had really grabbed me was its transparency. Without being very familiar with the language I found that I could tease out how some function or data structure worked just by poking around. My initial look at the Servant [introductory tutorial](https://docs.servant.dev/en/stable/tutorial/index.html) was not so straight forward.

It should be said that I was able to build a biggish [real world project](https://github.com/bradparker/servant-beam-realworld-example-app/) before doing any of this investigation. For me, one of the greatest strengths of Servant is how it intuitive it is.

To explore the specific type-level features used by Servant, and why they're used, we'll refer to an example API quite similar to one featured in the Servant tutorial.

```haskell
{-# LANGUAGE DataKinds #-}
{-# LANGUAGE TypeOperators #-}

import Servant
  ( (:<|>)((:<|>))
  , (:>)
  , Capture
  , Get
  , JSON
  )

type UsersIndex =
  Get '[JSON] [User]

type UsersShow =
  Capture "username" String
    :> Get '[JSON] (Maybe User)

type Users =
  "users"
    :> (UsersIndex :<|> UsersShow)
```

**Note** for each code example I'll try to show only the bits of the finished module which are relevant to what's being currently discussed. I have put together a [repository](https://github.com/bradparker/how-does-servants-type-dsl-work) containing a full working example for reference.

This API serves `User`s as JSON, so we'll need a user type, an [Aeson](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/aeson) instance for it and some example data.

```haskell
{-# LANGUAGE DeriveGeneric #-}

import Data.Aeson (ToJSON)
import Data.Time (Day, fromGregorian)
import GHC.Generics (Generic)

data User = User
  { name :: String
  , age :: Int
  , email :: String
  , username :: String
  , registration_date :: Day
  } deriving (Eq, Show, Generic)

instance ToJSON User

users :: [User]
users =
  [ User
      "Isaac Newton"
      372
      "isaac@newton.co.uk"
      "isaac"
      (fromGregorian 1683 3 1)
  , User
      "Albert Einstein"
      136
      "ae@mc2.org"
      "albert"
      (fromGregorian 1905 12 1)
  ]
```

Now to write a web server. At the end of the day a runnable Haskell program is a value of type `IO ()`. So how do we get from our `Users` API type to one of those?

The [servant-server](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/servant-server) package provides us a few functions for turning types like `Users` into [WAI](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/wai) `Application`s. The simplest of these is [`serve`](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/servant-server-0.16.2/docs/Servant-Server.html#v:serve) so that's what we'll go with.

```haskell
serve
  :: HasServer api '[]
  => Proxy api
  -> ServerT api Handler
  -> Application
```

**Note** we'll explore the type of `serve` more later.

The [warp](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/warp) package provides a `run` function to get us from an `Application` to a `IO ()`.

```haskell
run :: Port -> Application -> IO ()
```

We now have enough for a skeleton `main`.

```haskell
{-# LANGUAGE TypeApplications #-}

import Data.Proxy (Proxy(Proxy))
import Network.Wai (Application)
import Network.Wai.Handler.Warp (run)
import Servant (serve)

usersApp :: Application
usersApp = serve (Proxy @Users) _usersServer

main :: IO ()
main = run 8080 usersApp
```

If we try to compile what we have so far we get the following error.

```
• Found hole:
    _usersServer
      :: Handler [User] :<|> ([Char] -> Handler (Maybe User))
```

If we ask GHCi what the type of `serve` is when partially applied with `Proxy Users` we see something similar.

```
 > :t serve (Proxy @Users)
serve (Proxy @Users)
  :: (Handler [User] :<|> ([Char] -> Handler (Maybe User)))
     -> Application
```

Now this is interesting. In the type of `serve` where previously there was a `ServerT api Handler` there is now a fairly odd looking type. Let's take a step back and try to get a handle on what's going on.

Let's take a better look at `serve`.

```haskell
serve
  :: HasServer api '[]
  => Proxy api
  -> ServerT api Handler
  -> Application
```

There's a type variable `api`, which is constrained to be types with a `HasServer` instance. There's then two arguments, both referring to that constrained `api` type. We'll explain what the `Proxy api` is for as a bonus but most of our attention will be placed on the `ServerT api Handler` argument.

What is `ServerT`? Why does it disappear when `Users` is substituted for `api`? It can't be a type constructor, type constructors don't just disappear. Let's start by asking GHCi.

```
 > :info ServerT
class HasServer (api :: k)
                (context :: [*]) where
  type family ServerT (api :: k) (m :: * -> *) :: *
  ...
        -- Defined in ‘Servant.Server.Internal’
```

`ServerT` is a [type family](https://downloads.haskell.org/~ghc/latest/docs/html/users_guide/glasgow_exts.html#type-families). Type families look quite like type constructors. Like type constructors they accept types as arguments, unlike type constructors they're able to return different types depending on those arguments. It ends up looking something like a function which pattern matches on types.

`ServerT` is defined as part of the `HasServer` type class, it will be defined for any type which has a `HasServer` instance. It accepts the [poly-kinded](https://downloads.haskell.org/~ghc/7.8.4/docs/html/users_guide/kind-polymorphism.html) `api` type `HasServer` is parameterized over as its first argument and some type constructor `m` of kind `* -> *` as it's second. It then returns some type of kind `*`.

Let's see if we can find an example. We'll start with something smaller than `Users`, `UsersIndex`. Let's see if we can find the `HasServer` instance that comes into play when we apply `UsersIndex` to `serve`.

```
 > :t serve (Proxy @UsersIndex)
serve (Proxy @UsersIndex)
  :: Handler [User] -> Application
```

Again, GHCi will be a big help here. First, what do we know about `UsersIndex`?

```
 > :info UsersIndex
type UsersIndex = Get '[JSON] [User]
        -- Defined at src/Main.hs:53:1
```

Right, it's an alias for `Get '[JSON] [User]`. So what do we know about `Get`?

```
 > :info Get
type Get =
  Servant.API.Verbs.Verb 'Network.HTTP.Types.Method.GET 200
  :: [*] -> * -> *
        -- Defined in ‘Servant.API.Verbs’
```

`Get` is an alias for `Verb 'GET 200`. What do we know about `Verb`?

```
 > import GHC.Types (Nat)
 > import Servant.API.Verbs (Verb)
 > :info Verb
type role Verb phantom phantom phantom phantom
data Verb (method :: k1)
          (statusCode :: Nat)
          (contentTypes :: [*])
          a
        -- Defined in ‘Servant.API.Verbs’
instance [safe] forall k1 (method :: k1) (statusCode :: Nat) (contentTypes :: [*]) a.
                Generic (Verb method statusCode contentTypes a)
  -- Defined in ‘Servant.API.Verbs’
type instance ServerT (Verb method status ctypes a) m = m a
        -- Defined in ‘Servant.Server.Internal’
```

There we go. `Verb` has a `HasServer` instance, and GHCi has even printed out the `ServerT` implementation defined for it too.

```haskell
type instance ServerT
  (Verb method status ctypes a) m = m a
```

If we cheat a little and replace `Verb method status` with `Get` it might look a little clearer.

```haskell
type instance ServerT
  (Get ctypes a) m = m a
```

If we cheat a little more we can substitute all the variables with types specific to `UsersIndex`.

```Haskell
type instance ServerT
  (Get '[JSON] [User]) m = m [User]
```

We don't need to just cheat though, we can use GHCi to evaluate type families for us. However, in order to evaluate `ServerT` for `UsersIndex` we'll need to pick what `m` should be. We can pick anything that's of kind `* -> *` so let's go with `Maybe` for now.

```
 > :kind! ServerT UsersIndex Maybe
ServerT UsersIndex Maybe :: *
= Maybe [User]
```

Commit message:

No need for shenanigans with Maybe

content/posts/2019-08-10-servant-types.md, after:

---
title: Servant's type-level domain specific language
tags: development
summary: |
  Haskell has some _very_ interesting type-level features, Servant is a great case-study in how they can be used to build a practical and feature rich library. This post walks through an example in an attempt to become more familiar with its inner workings.

  ```haskell
  type UsersIndex =
    Get '[JSON] [User]

  type UsersShow =
    Capture "username" String
      :> Get '[JSON] (Maybe User)

  type Users =
    "users"
      :> (UsersIndex :<|> UsersShow)
  ```
---

I was shown [Servant](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/servant) by a friend of mine a few years ago. It's fair to say that, initially, I was overwhelmed. Haskell was a new language to me however one of the things that had really grabbed me was its transparency. Without being very familiar with the language I found that I could tease out how some function or data structure worked just by poking around. My initial look at the Servant [introductory tutorial](https://docs.servant.dev/en/stable/tutorial/index.html) was not so straight forward.

It should be said that I was able to build a biggish [real world project](https://github.com/bradparker/servant-beam-realworld-example-app/) before doing any of this investigation. For me, one of the greatest strengths of Servant is how it intuitive it is.

To explore the specific type-level features used by Servant, and why they're used, we'll refer to an example API quite similar to one featured in the Servant tutorial.

```haskell
{-# LANGUAGE DataKinds #-}
{-# LANGUAGE TypeOperators #-}

import Servant
  ( (:<|>)((:<|>))
  , (:>)
  , Capture
  , Get
  , JSON
  )

type UsersIndex =
  Get '[JSON] [User]

type UsersShow =
  Capture "username" String
    :> Get '[JSON] (Maybe User)

type Users =
  "users"
    :> (UsersIndex :<|> UsersShow)
```

**Note** for each code example I'll try to show only the bits of the finished module which are relevant to what's being currently discussed. I have put together a [repository](https://github.com/bradparker/how-does-servants-type-dsl-work) containing a full working example for reference.

This API serves `User`s as JSON, so we'll need a user type, an [Aeson](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/aeson) instance for it and some example data.

```haskell
{-# LANGUAGE DeriveGeneric #-}

import Data.Aeson (ToJSON)
import Data.Time (Day, fromGregorian)
import GHC.Generics (Generic)

data User = User
  { name :: String
  , age :: Int
  , email :: String
  , username :: String
  , registration_date :: Day
  } deriving (Eq, Show, Generic)

instance ToJSON User

users :: [User]
users =
  [ User
      "Isaac Newton"
      372
      "isaac@newton.co.uk"
      "isaac"
      (fromGregorian 1683 3 1)
  , User
      "Albert Einstein"
      136
      "ae@mc2.org"
      "albert"
      (fromGregorian 1905 12 1)
  ]
```

Now to write a web server. At the end of the day a runnable Haskell program is a value of type `IO ()`. So how do we get from our `Users` API type to one of those?

The [servant-server](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/servant-server) package provides us a few functions for turning types like `Users` into [WAI](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/wai) `Application`s. The simplest of these is [`serve`](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/servant-server-0.16.2/docs/Servant-Server.html#v:serve) so that's what we'll go with.

```haskell
serve
  :: HasServer api '[]
  => Proxy api
  -> ServerT api Handler
  -> Application
```

**Note** we'll explore the type of `serve` more later.

The [warp](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/warp) package provides a `run` function to get us from an `Application` to a `IO ()`.

```haskell
run :: Port -> Application -> IO ()
```

We now have enough for a skeleton `main`.

```haskell
{-# LANGUAGE TypeApplications #-}

import Data.Proxy (Proxy(Proxy))
import Network.Wai (Application)
import Network.Wai.Handler.Warp (run)
import Servant (serve)

usersApp :: Application
usersApp = serve (Proxy @Users) _usersServer

main :: IO ()
main = run 8080 usersApp
```

If we try to compile what we have so far we get the following error.

```
• Found hole:
    _usersServer
      :: Handler [User] :<|> ([Char] -> Handler (Maybe User))
```

If we ask GHCi what the type of `serve` is when partially applied with `Proxy Users` we see something similar.

```
 > :t serve (Proxy @Users)
serve (Proxy @Users)
  :: (Handler [User] :<|> ([Char] -> Handler (Maybe User)))
     -> Application
```

Now this is interesting. In the type of `serve` where previously there was a `ServerT api Handler` there is now a fairly odd looking type. Let's take a step back and try to get a handle on what's going on.

Let's take a better look at `serve`.

```haskell
serve
  :: HasServer api '[]
  => Proxy api
  -> ServerT api Handler
  -> Application
```

There's a type variable `api`, which is constrained to be types with a `HasServer` instance. There's then two arguments, both referring to that constrained `api` type. We'll explain what the `Proxy api` is for as a bonus but most of our attention will be placed on the `ServerT api Handler` argument.

What is `ServerT`? Why does it disappear when `Users` is substituted for `api`? It can't be a type constructor, type constructors don't just disappear. Let's start by asking GHCi.

```
 > :info ServerT
class HasServer (api :: k)
                (context :: [*]) where
  type family ServerT (api :: k) (m :: * -> *) :: *
  ...
        -- Defined in ‘Servant.Server.Internal’
```

`ServerT` is a [type family](https://downloads.haskell.org/~ghc/latest/docs/html/users_guide/glasgow_exts.html#type-families). Type families look quite like type constructors. Like type constructors they accept types as arguments, unlike type constructors they're able to return different types depending on those arguments. It ends up looking something like a function which pattern matches on types.

`ServerT` is defined as part of the `HasServer` type class, it will be defined for any type which has a `HasServer` instance. It accepts the [poly-kinded](https://downloads.haskell.org/~ghc/7.8.4/docs/html/users_guide/kind-polymorphism.html) `api` type `HasServer` is parameterized over as its first argument and some type constructor `m` of kind `* -> *` as it's second. It then returns some type of kind `*`.

Let's see if we can find an example. We'll start with something smaller than `Users`, `UsersIndex`. Let's see if we can find the `HasServer` instance that comes into play when we apply `UsersIndex` to `serve`.

```
 > :t serve (Proxy @UsersIndex)
serve (Proxy @UsersIndex)
  :: Handler [User] -> Application
```

Again, GHCi will be a big help here. First, what do we know about `UsersIndex`?

```
 > :info UsersIndex
type UsersIndex = Get '[JSON] [User]
        -- Defined at src/Main.hs:53:1
```

Right, it's an alias for `Get '[JSON] [User]`. So what do we know about `Get`?

```
 > :info Get
type Get =
  Servant.API.Verbs.Verb 'Network.HTTP.Types.Method.GET 200
  :: [*] -> * -> *
        -- Defined in ‘Servant.API.Verbs’
```

`Get` is an alias for `Verb 'GET 200`. What do we know about `Verb`?

```
 > import GHC.Types (Nat)
 > import Servant.API.Verbs (Verb)
 > :info Verb
type role Verb phantom phantom phantom phantom
data Verb (method :: k1)
          (statusCode :: Nat)
          (contentTypes :: [*])
          a
        -- Defined in ‘Servant.API.Verbs’
instance [safe] forall k1 (method :: k1) (statusCode :: Nat) (contentTypes :: [*]) a.
                Generic (Verb method statusCode contentTypes a)
  -- Defined in ‘Servant.API.Verbs’
type instance ServerT (Verb method status ctypes a) m = m a
        -- Defined in ‘Servant.Server.Internal’
```

There we go. `Verb` has a `HasServer` instance, and GHCi has even printed out the `ServerT` implementation defined for it too.

```haskell
type instance ServerT
  (Verb method status ctypes a) m = m a
```

If we cheat a little and replace `Verb method status` with `Get` it might look a little clearer.

```haskell
type instance ServerT
  (Get ctypes a) m = m a
```

If we cheat a little more we can substitute all the variables with types specific to `serve (Proxy @UsersIndex)`.

```Haskell
type instance ServerT
  (Get '[JSON] [User]) Handler =
    Handler [User]
```

We don't need to just cheat though, we can use GHCi to evaluate type families for us.

```
 > :kind! ServerT UsersIndex Handler
ServerT UsersIndex Handler :: *
= Handler [User]
```
