content/posts/2019-11-05-getting-close-to-the-conceptual-metal.md, before:

---
title: Getting close to the conceptual metal
tags: development
summary: |
  Writing software can give us the ability to take a seemingly impossibly abstract idea and use it to create a runnable program.

  In this post we're to talk about "fundamental things" and see how much we can build with them.

  ```haskell
  type a × b =
    forall c.
      (a -> b -> c) -> c

  type a + b =
    forall c.
      (a -> c) -> (b -> c) -> c
  ```
---

A few years ago I watched the [_Structure and interpretation of computer programs_ video lectures](https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-engineering-and-computer-science/6-001-structure-and-interpretation-of-computer-programs-spring-2005/video-lectures/), kindly posted publicly by MIT OpenCourseWare. There's so much interesting material in them but one part really struck me, in [_5B: Computational Objects_](https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-engineering-and-computer-science/6-001-structure-and-interpretation-of-computer-programs-spring-2005/video-lectures/5b-computational-objects/) Gerald Jay Sussman defines a pair "in terms of nothing but air, hot air".

```scheme
(define (cons x y)
  (λ (m) (m x y)))

(define (car x)
  (x (λ (a b) a)))

(define (car x)
  (x (λ (a b) b)))
```

Previous lectures had established pairs as a sort of fundamental thing. After all, pairs could be used to make lists and in LISP once you've got pairs and lists you've got _a lot_. Sussman, however, was revealing that there was a level below that, there was an even more fundamental thing: functions.

Later, through learning Haskell, I became familiar with the concept of algebraic data types. It was astonishing to me that you could make so much out of so little. You seemingly only need types that are "pair-like" (_products_) and types that are "either-like" (_sums_).

```haskell
data Product a b
  = P a b

data Sum a b
  = A a
  | B b

newtype Maybe a
  = Maybe (Sum () a)

newtype List a
  = List (Maybe (Product a (List a)))

newtype NonEmpty a
  = NonEmpty (Product a (List a))
```

When Sussman chalked up that pair made of nothing but "hot air" he attributed the encoding to [Alonzo Church](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alonzo_Church). Appreciating that many other types can be made from pair-like things and either-like things I wondered if there existed a Church encoding for `Either`. After all, with `Either` and `Pair` it sure seemed like I'd be able to construct anything else I needed. I found Church encodings for lots of other interesting things, like [booleans](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Church_encoding#Church_Booleans) and [natural numbers](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Church_encoding#Church_numerals), but nothing quite like `Either`.

Eventually I'd happen across [Scott encoding](https://oxij.org/paper/ExceptionallyMonadic/ExceptionallyMonadic.xetex.pdf#24), named for [Dana Scott](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dana_Scott) to whom it is attributed. It's very interesting, and the topic of this post.

## Making everything out of nothing

This post uses Haskell, so we're going to build a parser. However the twist here is that before we can build _our_ parser, we must first build the universe.

We're going to use Scott encoding to build _every_ type we'll need to end up with a working [monadic parser](http://www.cs.nott.ac.uk/~pszgmh/pearl.pdf). Or to put it another way: we're going to build _every_ type we need out of only functions. The type we're working towards should look like this:

```haskell
newtype Parser a = Parser
  { parse :: String -> Maybe (Pair a String)
  }
```

Which is made of all these things:

```haskell
newtype Maybe a = ...

newtype Pair a b = ...

newtype Nat = ...

newtype List a = ...

newtype Char = Char Nat

newtype String = String (List Char)
```

Keep in mind that at the bottom of all of this will sit only functions. At the end of the day `(->)` will be the only primitive we need to construct everything.

## Scott encoding

Paraphrasing Wikipedia: say we have a datatype _D_, with _N_ constructors, (_c_<sub>1</sub> &hellip; _c<sub>N</sub>_), such that constructor _c<sub>i</sub>_ has arity _A<sub>i_, then the Scott encoding for constructor _c<sub>i</sub>_ of _D_ would be:

_&lambda;x_<sub>1</sub> &hellip; _x<sub>A<sub>i</sub></sub>_. _&lambda;c_<sub>1</sub> &hellip; _c<sub>N</sub>_. _c<sub>i</sub>_ _x_<sub>1</sub> &hellip; _x<sub>A<sub>i</sub></sub>_

We can write a few instances out in Haskell to make this more concrete.

If we have a data type `One` with _one_ constructor, which takes _one_ argument it would look like this:

```haskell
type One x =
  forall r. (x -> r) -> r
```

And its only constructor would look like this:

```haskell
one :: x -> One x
one = \x -> \c -> c x
```

Which in the above notation would look like:

_&lambda;x_. _&lambda;c_. _cx_

Note that constructors need not take any arguments. For example:

```haskell
type Single =
  forall r. r -> r
```

This is a type which has one constructor which does not take any arguments. What might that constructor look like?

```haskell
single :: Single
single = \c -> c
```

But I won't dwell on this for now as it looks a little funny in the other notation:

_&lambda;c_. _c_

Now let's add a constructor. Let's define a type `Or` which has _two_ constructors, each taking _one_ argument.

The type:

```haskell
type Or x y =
  forall r. (x -> r) -> (y -> r) -> r
```

The first constructor:

```haskell
first :: x -> Or x y
first = \x -> \c1 c2 -> c1 x
```

_&lambda;x_. _&lambda;c_<sub>1</sub>,_c_<sub>2</sub>. _c_<sub>1</sub>_x_

And the second:

```haskell
second :: y -> Or x y
second = \y -> \c1 c2 -> c2 y
```

_&lambda;y_. _&lambda;c_<sub>1</sub>,_c_<sub>2</sub>. _c_<sub>2</sub>_y_

So then, to add a constructor we add an argument to the function that represents our type. This makes it possible for us to write a function which _chooses_ to use that argument. Note that _first_ chooses _c_<sub>1</sub> and _second_ chooses _c_<sub>2</sub>.

If we go back to one constructor, but now taking two arguments, the type could look like:

```haskell
type And x1 x2 =
  forall r. (x1 -> x2 -> r) -> r
```

And its constructor:

```haskell
and :: x1 -> x2 -> And x1 x2
and = \x1 x2 -> \c -> c x1 x2
```

Which translates to:

_&lambda;x_<sub>1</sub>, _x_<sub>2</sub>. _&lambda;c_. _cx_<sub>1</sub>_x_<sub>2</sub>

So then, to add an argument to a constructor you add an argument to the function it will choose to call.

Here are some possibly familiar types encoded in this way:

```haskell
-- Adding constructors
type Void       = forall r. r
type Unit       = forall r. r -> r
type Bool       = forall r. r -> r -> r

-- Adding arguments to constructors
type Identity a = forall r. (a -> r) -> r
type Pair a b   = forall r. (a -> b -> r) -> r

-- Adding constructors and arguments
type Maybe a    = forall r. r -> (a -> r) -> r
type Either a b = forall r. (a -> r) -> (b -> r) -> r
```

## Where the rubber meets the road

So far this is very theoretical, we haven't built anything yet. Let's aim to remedy that. We're going to implement an [alternate Prelude](https://hackage.haskell.org/packages/tag/prelude) called [_Hot Air_](https://github.com/bradparker/hot-air) which will contain just enough pieces to build our Parser.

### Building up to `String`

Our `Parser` takes a `String` as input. Therefore in order to implement it we'll first need to implement `String`.

What are `String`s made of? This a big and complex topic, so we're going to avoid all that and aim to replicate the contentious but fairly simple representation used by the Haskell base libraries. Our `String` will be a list of characters.

```haskell
newtype String =
  String (List Char)
```

There are two types we'll need to make this one: `List` and `Char`. Let's start with `Char`.

What are `Char`s made of? Again, a complex topic we're going to hop right over by going with an incomplete but simple definition: a `Char` is a natural number that we treat specially.

```haskell
newtype Char =
  Char Nat
```

What are `Nat`s made of? Now we're getting somewhere. `Nat`s are made of functions, and nothing else. To arrive at the definition we'll start with one that uses "normal" algebraic data types, and replace as much Haskell syntax as we can with functions. Here's a data type that represents the natural numbers:

```haskell
data Nat
  = Zero
  | Succ Nat
```

It means that a `Nat` can either be `Zero` or "the successor to some other natural number", `Succ`.

The Scott encoding for this type will be a function which takes an argument for each constructor, represented by holes for now:

```haskell
newtype Nat =
  Nat (forall r. _ -> _ -> r)
```

The first constructor takes no arguments.

```haskell
newtype Nat =
  Nat (forall r. r -> _ -> r)
```

The second constructor _does_ take an argument, of type `Nat`. To represent this the second argument will need to be a function that accepts a value of `Nat`.

```haskell
newtype Nat =
  Nat (forall r. r -> (Nat -> r) -> r)
```

That's the type done, now to write the constructors. The first constructor (called `Zero` in the normal type above) looks like this.

```haskell
zero :: Nat
zero = Nat (\z _ -> z)
```

It _chooses_ to return the value passed as the first argument to the `Nat` function. The second constructor (called `Succ` above) looks like this:

```haskell
succ :: Nat -> Nat
succ n = Nat (\_ s -> s n)
```

It _chooses_ to call the function passed as the second argument to the `Nat` function with the value it's been supplied.

We can now construct natural numbers, but they're still not of any use until we have some way to _deconstruct_ them. Unlike "normal" Haskell data types we'll not be able to pattern match our way from a `Nat` to some other type. Let's say we want to write the function `subtractOne` which subtracts one from any natural number except zero, which it leaves unchanged. With the normal type we could match the cases and get to something like:

```haskell
subtractOne :: Nat -> Nat
subtractOne nat =
  case nat of
    Zero -> Zero
    Succ n -> n
```

The implementation for Scott encoded `Nat`s will look a bit different.

```haskell
subtractOne :: Nat -> Nat
subtractOne (Nat nat) =
  nat
    zero
    (\n -> n)
```

The function that represents a `Nat`, called `nat` above, accepts an argument _for each case_. The first argument is the `Zero` case and the second is the `Succ n` case. If the `nat` in question was constructed using `zero` it will choose the first argument it is passed, in this case `zero`. If it was constructed using `succ` then it will choose to call the second argument with the `Nat` it was supposed to be the successor of, therefore behaving as if that `Nat` had never been effected by it.

Being able to subtract one from a `Nat` doesn't make them especially useful, folding a `Nat` into some other value, that'll be useful. So how do we do that?

Again if we were dealing with the normal Haskell data type we might write something like this:

```haskell
foldNat :: c -> (c -> c) -> Nat -> c
foldNat z f nat =
  case nat of
    Zero -> z
    Succ n -> f (foldNat z f n)
```

The translation to the Scott encoded version is very similar to what we did with `subtractOne`.

```haskell
foldNat :: c -> (c -> c) -> Nat -> c
foldNat z f (Nat nat) =
  nat
    z
    (\n -> f (foldNat z f n))
```

Now that we can fold `Nat`s we can transform them into good ol' Haskell `Num`s.

```haskell
toNum :: Num n => Nat -> n
toNum = foldNat 0 (+ 1)
```

Now, for the first time we can actually _run_ something.

```
$ ghci lib/HotAir/Num.hs

> toNum zero
0
> toNum (succ zero)
1
> toNum (succ (succ zero))
2
> toNum (succ (succ (succ zero)))
3
```

We can go _to_ Haskell numbers, but what about converting _from_ them. For that we might want some way of unfolding a value into a `Nat`.

Again we can think about how we'd do it with ordinary Haskell data types and then translate our solution to work with Scott encoded data types.

```haskell
unfoldNat :: (c -> Maybe c) -> c -> Nat
unfoldNat f c =
  case f c of
    Nothing -> c
    Just c' -> succ (unfoldNat f c')
```

But wait, to write that function we first need a `Maybe` data type. Now that we've done `Nat` I reckon `Maybe` isn't going to be too much of a stretch.

As with `Nat` we will have two constructors.

```haskell
newtype Maybe a =
  Maybe (forall r. _ -> _ -> r)
```

The first constructor will be nullary, it won't accept any arguments.

```haskell
newtype Maybe a =
  Maybe (forall r. r -> _ -> r)
```

The second will be unary, it'll accept one argument of the type `a`.

```haskell
newtype Maybe a =
  Maybe (forall r. r -> (a -> r) -> r)
```

Now to write those two constructors.

```haskell
nothing :: Maybe a
nothing = Maybe (\n _ -> n)

just :: a -> Maybe a
just a = Maybe (\_ j -> j a)
```

And some way of _using_ a value of type `Maybe`.

```haskell
maybe :: c -> (a -> c) -> Maybe a -> c
maybe c f (Maybe m) = m c f
```

That should be all we need.

```haskell
unfoldNat :: (c -> Maybe c) -> c -> Nat
unfoldNat f c =
  maybe
    c
    (\c' -> succ (unfoldNat f c')
    (f c)
```

Can we now convert `Nat`s to and from `Num`s?

```haskell
fromNum :: (Ord n, Num n) => n -> Nat
fromNum =
  unfoldNat
    (\n ->
       if n <= 0
         then nothing
         else just (n - 1))
```

We can, but we'll come back to this later, using even less of the pre-existing universe.

```
$ ghci lib/HotAir/Num.hs

> toNum (fromNum 3)
3
> toNum (fromNum 1024)
1024
```

Now that we're able to convert `Nat`s to `Num`s and back again, we're also able to go from our `Char` to the builtin Haskell `Char` and back again. Like so:

```haskell
import qualified Data.Char as Builtin

import HotAir.Nat (fromNum, toNum)

fromBuiltin :: Builtin.Char -> Char
fromBuiltin = Char . fromNum . Builtin.ord

toBuiltin :: Char -> Builtin.Char
toBuiltin (Char c) = Builtin.chr (toNum c)
```

It's not much but we can see that it "works".

```
$ ghci lib/HotAir/Char.hs

> toBuiltin (fromBuiltin 'c')
'c'
> toBuiltin (fromBuiltin '!')
'!'
```

All that remains for `String` is a list to put all these `Char`s in. Now that we've done `Nat` and `Maybe` I reckon `List` won't be too bad.

A `List`, like `Nat` and `Maybe` has two constructors.

```haskell
newtype List a =
  List (forall r. _ -> _ -> r)
```

Like `Maybe` the first will be nullary.

```haskell
newtype List a =
  List (forall r. r -> _ -> r)

nil :: List a
nil = List (\r _ -> r)

cons :: _
cons = _
```

Like `Nat` the second will be recursive, it will accept a `List` as one of its arguments. Unlike `Nat` it will _also_ accept a value.

```haskell
newtype List a =
  List (forall r. r -> (a -> List a -> r) -> r)

nil :: List a
nil = List (\n _ -> n)

cons :: a -> List a -> List a
cons a as = List (\_ c -> c a as)
```

The `cons` function accepts an `a` and a `List a` and then _chooses_ the second function passed to `List` to apply them both to.

To see how this adds up to a list it helps to write `foldr`.

```haskell
foldr :: (a -> c -> c) -> c -> List a -> c
foldr f c (List l) =
  _
```

The `l` variable above is a function `c -> (a -> List a -> c) -> c` in this case. So it's able to produce a `c` we just need to _provide_ it a `c` and a function `a -> List a -> c`. Things will get a little twisty here.

Providing a `c` is easy enough.

```haskell
foldr :: (a -> c -> c) -> c -> List a -> c
foldr f c (List l) =
  l c _
```

The function will take a little more thinking.

```haskell
foldr :: (a -> c -> c) -> c -> List a -> c
foldr f c (List l) =
  l c (\a as -> _)
```

Now we have an `a`, a `List a` and a function `a -> c -> c` (the variable `f`). We want to use those to produce a `c`.

Here's a solution.

```haskell
foldr :: (a -> c -> c) -> c -> List a -> c
foldr f c (List l) =
  l c (\a as -> f a c)
```

That makes the types line up, but it doesn't do what we want it to do. This won't fold over _all_ of the provided list. It'll iterate over at most one element (or none if the list should have none). As with moving from `subtractOne` to `foldNat` we'll need to introduce some recursion.

```haskell
foldr :: (a -> c -> c) -> c -> List a -> c
foldr f c (List l) =
  l c (\a as -> f a (foldr f c as))
```

With `foldr` we have enough to start using `List`s.

```
$ ghci lib/HotAir/List.hs

> import GHC.Num ((+))
> foldr (+) 0 (cons 1 (cons 1 nil))
2
```

We also have enough to write conversions between the builtin string type and our `HotAir` string type.

```haskell
import qualified Data.List as Builtin
import qualified Data.String as Builtin

import HotAir.Char (Char)
import qualified HotAir.Char as Char
import HotAir.List (cons, foldr, nil)

toBuiltin :: String -> Builtin.String
toBuiltin (String chars) =
  foldr ((:) . Char.toBuiltin) [] chars

fromBuiltin :: Builtin.String -> String
fromBuiltin =
  String
    . Builtin.foldr (cons . Char.fromBuiltin) nil
```

Which means that we can write `Show` and `IsString` instances.

```haskell
import qualified Data.String as Builtin
import qualified Text.Show as Builtin

instance Builtin.IsString String where
  fromString = fromBuiltin

instance Builtin.Show String where
  show = Builtin.show . toBuiltin
```

Which means we're able to easily create and view values of our `String` type in GHCi.

```
$ ghci lib/HotAir/String.hs

> "Hello, Hot Air!" :: HotAir.String.String
"Hello, Hot Air!"
```

However at this point you might be wondering if we've really achieved anything at all.

Commit message:

We're done (almost) with "built in" things

content/posts/2019-11-05-getting-close-to-the-conceptual-metal.md, after:

---
title: Getting close to the conceptual metal
tags: development
summary: |
  Writing software can give us the ability to take a seemingly impossibly abstract idea and use it to create a runnable program.

  In this post we're to talk about "fundamental things" and see how much we can build with them.

  ```haskell
  type a × b =
    forall c.
      (a -> b -> c) -> c

  type a + b =
    forall c.
      (a -> c) -> (b -> c) -> c
  ```
---

A few years ago I watched the [_Structure and interpretation of computer programs_ video lectures](https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-engineering-and-computer-science/6-001-structure-and-interpretation-of-computer-programs-spring-2005/video-lectures/), kindly posted publicly by MIT OpenCourseWare. There's so much interesting material in them but one part really struck me, in [_5B: Computational Objects_](https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-engineering-and-computer-science/6-001-structure-and-interpretation-of-computer-programs-spring-2005/video-lectures/5b-computational-objects/) Gerald Jay Sussman defines a pair "in terms of nothing but air, hot air".

```scheme
(define (cons x y)
  (λ (m) (m x y)))

(define (car x)
  (x (λ (a b) a)))

(define (car x)
  (x (λ (a b) b)))
```

Previous lectures had established pairs as a sort of fundamental thing. After all, pairs could be used to make lists and in LISP once you've got pairs and lists you've got _a lot_. Sussman, however, was revealing that there was a level below that, there was an even more fundamental thing: functions.

Later, through learning Haskell, I became familiar with the concept of algebraic data types. It was astonishing to me that you could make so much out of so little. You seemingly only need types that are "pair-like" (_products_) and types that are "either-like" (_sums_).

```haskell
data Product a b
  = P a b

data Sum a b
  = A a
  | B b

newtype Maybe a
  = Maybe (Sum () a)

newtype List a
  = List (Maybe (Product a (List a)))

newtype NonEmpty a
  = NonEmpty (Product a (List a))
```

When Sussman chalked up that pair made of nothing but "hot air" he attributed the encoding to [Alonzo Church](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alonzo_Church). Appreciating that many other types can be made from pair-like things and either-like things I wondered if there existed a Church encoding for `Either`. After all, with `Either` and `Pair` it sure seemed like I'd be able to construct anything else I needed. I found Church encodings for lots of other interesting things, like [booleans](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Church_encoding#Church_Booleans) and [natural numbers](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Church_encoding#Church_numerals), but nothing quite like `Either`.

Eventually I'd happen across [Scott encoding](https://oxij.org/paper/ExceptionallyMonadic/ExceptionallyMonadic.xetex.pdf#24), named for [Dana Scott](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dana_Scott) to whom it is attributed. It's very interesting, and the topic of this post.

## Making everything out of nothing

This post uses Haskell, so we're going to build a parser. However the twist here is that before we can build _our_ parser, we must first build the universe.

We're going to use Scott encoding to build _every_ type we'll need to end up with a working [monadic parser](http://www.cs.nott.ac.uk/~pszgmh/pearl.pdf). Or to put it another way: we're going to build _every_ type we need out of only functions. The type we're working towards should look like this:

```haskell
newtype Parser a = Parser
  { parse :: String -> Maybe (Pair a String)
  }
```

Which is made of all these things:

```haskell
newtype Maybe a = ...

newtype Pair a b = ...

newtype Nat = ...

newtype List a = ...

newtype Char = Char Nat

newtype String = String (List Char)
```

Keep in mind that at the bottom of all of this will sit only functions. At the end of the day `(->)` will be the only primitive we need to construct everything.

## Scott encoding

Paraphrasing Wikipedia: say we have a datatype _D_, with _N_ constructors, (_c_<sub>1</sub> &hellip; _c<sub>N</sub>_), such that constructor _c<sub>i</sub>_ has arity _A<sub>i_, then the Scott encoding for constructor _c<sub>i</sub>_ of _D_ would be:

_&lambda;x_<sub>1</sub> &hellip; _x<sub>A<sub>i</sub></sub>_. _&lambda;c_<sub>1</sub> &hellip; _c<sub>N</sub>_. _c<sub>i</sub>_ _x_<sub>1</sub> &hellip; _x<sub>A<sub>i</sub></sub>_

We can write a few instances out in Haskell to make this more concrete.

If we have a data type `One` with _one_ constructor, which takes _one_ argument it would look like this:

```haskell
type One x =
  forall r. (x -> r) -> r
```

And its only constructor would look like this:

```haskell
one :: x -> One x
one = \x -> \c -> c x
```

Which in the above notation would look like:

_&lambda;x_. _&lambda;c_. _cx_

Note that constructors need not take any arguments. For example:

```haskell
type Single =
  forall r. r -> r
```

This is a type which has one constructor which does not take any arguments. What might that constructor look like?

```haskell
single :: Single
single = \c -> c
```

But I won't dwell on this for now as it looks a little funny in the other notation:

_&lambda;c_. _c_

Now let's add a constructor. Let's define a type `Or` which has _two_ constructors, each taking _one_ argument.

The type:

```haskell
type Or x y =
  forall r. (x -> r) -> (y -> r) -> r
```

The first constructor:

```haskell
first :: x -> Or x y
first = \x -> \c1 c2 -> c1 x
```

_&lambda;x_. _&lambda;c_<sub>1</sub>,_c_<sub>2</sub>. _c_<sub>1</sub>_x_

And the second:

```haskell
second :: y -> Or x y
second = \y -> \c1 c2 -> c2 y
```

_&lambda;y_. _&lambda;c_<sub>1</sub>,_c_<sub>2</sub>. _c_<sub>2</sub>_y_

So then, to add a constructor we add an argument to the function that represents our type. This makes it possible for us to write a function which _chooses_ to use that argument. Note that _first_ chooses _c_<sub>1</sub> and _second_ chooses _c_<sub>2</sub>.

If we go back to one constructor, but now taking two arguments, the type could look like:

```haskell
type And x1 x2 =
  forall r. (x1 -> x2 -> r) -> r
```

And its constructor:

```haskell
and :: x1 -> x2 -> And x1 x2
and = \x1 x2 -> \c -> c x1 x2
```

Which translates to:

_&lambda;x_<sub>1</sub>, _x_<sub>2</sub>. _&lambda;c_. _cx_<sub>1</sub>_x_<sub>2</sub>

So then, to add an argument to a constructor you add an argument to the function it will choose to call.

Here are some possibly familiar types encoded in this way:

```haskell
-- Adding constructors
type Void       = forall r. r
type Unit       = forall r. r -> r
type Bool       = forall r. r -> r -> r

-- Adding arguments to constructors
type Identity a = forall r. (a -> r) -> r
type Pair a b   = forall r. (a -> b -> r) -> r

-- Adding constructors and arguments
type Maybe a    = forall r. r -> (a -> r) -> r
type Either a b = forall r. (a -> r) -> (b -> r) -> r
```

## Where the rubber meets the road

So far this is very theoretical, we haven't built anything yet. Let's aim to remedy that. We're going to implement an [alternate Prelude](https://hackage.haskell.org/packages/tag/prelude) called [_Hot Air_](https://github.com/bradparker/hot-air) which will contain just enough pieces to build our Parser.

### Building up to `String`

Our `Parser` takes a `String` as input. Therefore in order to implement it we'll first need to implement `String`.

What are `String`s made of? This a big and complex topic, so we're going to avoid all that and aim to replicate the contentious but fairly simple representation used by the Haskell base libraries. Our `String` will be a list of characters.

```haskell
newtype String =
  String (List Char)
```

There are two types we'll need to make this one: `List` and `Char`. Let's start with `Char`.

What are `Char`s made of? Again, a complex topic we're going to hop right over by going with an incomplete but simple definition: a `Char` is a natural number that we treat specially.

```haskell
newtype Char =
  Char Nat
```

What are `Nat`s made of? Now we're getting somewhere. `Nat`s are made of functions, and nothing else. To arrive at the definition we'll start with one that uses "normal" algebraic data types, and replace as much Haskell syntax as we can with functions. Here's a data type that represents the natural numbers:

```haskell
data Nat
  = Zero
  | Succ Nat
```

It means that a `Nat` can either be `Zero` or "the successor to some other natural number", `Succ`.

The Scott encoding for this type will be a function which takes an argument for each constructor, represented by holes for now:

```haskell
newtype Nat =
  Nat (forall r. _ -> _ -> r)
```

The first constructor takes no arguments.

```haskell
newtype Nat =
  Nat (forall r. r -> _ -> r)
```

The second constructor _does_ take an argument, of type `Nat`. To represent this the second argument will need to be a function that accepts a value of `Nat`.

```haskell
newtype Nat =
  Nat (forall r. r -> (Nat -> r) -> r)
```

That's the type done, now to write the constructors. The first constructor (called `Zero` in the normal type above) looks like this.

```haskell
zero :: Nat
zero = Nat (\z _ -> z)
```

It _chooses_ to return the value passed as the first argument to the `Nat` function. The second constructor (called `Succ` above) looks like this:

```haskell
succ :: Nat -> Nat
succ n = Nat (\_ s -> s n)
```

It _chooses_ to call the function passed as the second argument to the `Nat` function with the value it's been supplied.

We can now construct natural numbers, but they're still not of any use until we have some way to _deconstruct_ them. Unlike "normal" Haskell data types we'll not be able to pattern match our way from a `Nat` to some other type. Let's say we want to write the function `subtractOne` which subtracts one from any natural number except zero, which it leaves unchanged. With the normal type we could match the cases and get to something like:

```haskell
subtractOne :: Nat -> Nat
subtractOne nat =
  case nat of
    Zero -> Zero
    Succ n -> n
```

The implementation for Scott encoded `Nat`s will look a bit different.

```haskell
subtractOne :: Nat -> Nat
subtractOne (Nat nat) =
  nat
    zero
    (\n -> n)
```

The function that represents a `Nat`, called `nat` above, accepts an argument _for each case_. The first argument is the `Zero` case and the second is the `Succ n` case. If the `nat` in question was constructed using `zero` it will choose the first argument it is passed, in this case `zero`. If it was constructed using `succ` then it will choose to call the second argument with the `Nat` it was supposed to be the successor of, therefore behaving as if that `Nat` had never been effected by it.

Being able to subtract one from a `Nat` doesn't make them especially useful, folding a `Nat` into some other value, that'll be useful. So how do we do that?

Again if we were dealing with the normal Haskell data type we might write something like this:

```haskell
foldNat :: c -> (c -> c) -> Nat -> c
foldNat z f nat =
  case nat of
    Zero -> z
    Succ n -> f (foldNat z f n)
```

The translation to the Scott encoded version is very similar to what we did with `subtractOne`.

```haskell
foldNat :: c -> (c -> c) -> Nat -> c
foldNat z f (Nat nat) =
  nat
    z
    (\n -> f (foldNat z f n))
```

Now that we can fold `Nat`s we can transform them into good ol' Haskell `Num`s.

```haskell
toNum :: Num n => Nat -> n
toNum = foldNat 0 (+ 1)
```

Now, for the first time we can actually _run_ something.

```
$ ghci lib/HotAir/Num.hs

> toNum zero
0
> toNum (succ zero)
1
> toNum (succ (succ zero))
2
> toNum (succ (succ (succ zero)))
3
```

We can go _to_ Haskell numbers, but what about converting _from_ them. For that we might want some way of unfolding a value into a `Nat`.

Again we can think about how we'd do it with ordinary Haskell data types and then translate our solution to work with Scott encoded data types.

```haskell
unfoldNat :: (c -> Maybe c) -> c -> Nat
unfoldNat f c =
  case f c of
    Nothing -> c
    Just c' -> succ (unfoldNat f c')
```

But wait, to write that function we first need a `Maybe` data type. Now that we've done `Nat` I reckon `Maybe` isn't going to be too much of a stretch.

As with `Nat` we will have two constructors.

```haskell
newtype Maybe a =
  Maybe (forall r. _ -> _ -> r)
```

The first constructor will be nullary, it won't accept any arguments.

```haskell
newtype Maybe a =
  Maybe (forall r. r -> _ -> r)
```

The second will be unary, it'll accept one argument of the type `a`.

```haskell
newtype Maybe a =
  Maybe (forall r. r -> (a -> r) -> r)
```

Now to write those two constructors.

```haskell
nothing :: Maybe a
nothing = Maybe (\n _ -> n)

just :: a -> Maybe a
just a = Maybe (\_ j -> j a)
```

And some way of _using_ a value of type `Maybe`.

```haskell
maybe :: c -> (a -> c) -> Maybe a -> c
maybe c f (Maybe m) = m c f
```

That should be all we need.

```haskell
unfoldNat :: (c -> Maybe c) -> c -> Nat
unfoldNat f c =
  maybe
    c
    (\c' -> succ (unfoldNat f c')
    (f c)
```

Can we now convert `Nat`s to and from `Num`s?

```haskell
fromNum :: (Ord n, Num n) => n -> Nat
fromNum =
  unfoldNat
    (\n ->
       if n <= 0
         then nothing
         else just (n - 1))
```

We can, but we'll come back to this later, using even less of the pre-existing universe.

```
$ ghci lib/HotAir/Num.hs

> toNum (fromNum 3)
3
> toNum (fromNum 1024)
1024
```

Now that we're able to convert `Nat`s to `Num`s and back again, we're also able to go from our `Char` to the builtin Haskell `Char` and back again. Like so:

```haskell
import qualified Data.Char as Builtin

import HotAir.Nat (fromNum, toNum)

fromBuiltin :: Builtin.Char -> Char
fromBuiltin = Char . fromNum . Builtin.ord

toBuiltin :: Char -> Builtin.Char
toBuiltin (Char c) = Builtin.chr (toNum c)
```

It's not much but we can see that it "works".

```
$ ghci lib/HotAir/Char.hs

> toBuiltin (fromBuiltin 'c')
'c'
> toBuiltin (fromBuiltin '!')
'!'
```

All that remains for `String` is a list to put all these `Char`s in. Now that we've done `Nat` and `Maybe` I reckon `List` won't be too bad.

A `List`, like `Nat` and `Maybe` has two constructors.

```haskell
newtype List a =
  List (forall r. _ -> _ -> r)
```

Like `Maybe` the first will be nullary.

```haskell
newtype List a =
  List (forall r. r -> _ -> r)

nil :: List a
nil = List (\r _ -> r)

cons :: _
cons = _
```

Like `Nat` the second will be recursive, it will accept a `List` as one of its arguments. Unlike `Nat` it will _also_ accept a value.

```haskell
newtype List a =
  List (forall r. r -> (a -> List a -> r) -> r)

nil :: List a
nil = List (\n _ -> n)

cons :: a -> List a -> List a
cons a as = List (\_ c -> c a as)
```

The `cons` function accepts an `a` and a `List a` and then _chooses_ the second function passed to `List` to apply them both to.

To see how this adds up to a list it helps to write `foldr`.

```haskell
foldr :: (a -> c -> c) -> c -> List a -> c
foldr f c (List l) =
  _
```

The `l` variable above is a function `c -> (a -> List a -> c) -> c` in this case. So it's able to produce a `c` we just need to _provide_ it a `c` and a function `a -> List a -> c`. Things will get a little twisty here.

Providing a `c` is easy enough.

```haskell
foldr :: (a -> c -> c) -> c -> List a -> c
foldr f c (List l) =
  l c _
```

The function will take a little more thinking.

```haskell
foldr :: (a -> c -> c) -> c -> List a -> c
foldr f c (List l) =
  l c (\a as -> _)
```

Now we have an `a`, a `List a` and a function `a -> c -> c` (the variable `f`). We want to use those to produce a `c`.

Here's a solution.

```haskell
foldr :: (a -> c -> c) -> c -> List a -> c
foldr f c (List l) =
  l c (\a as -> f a c)
```

That makes the types line up, but it doesn't do what we want it to do. This won't fold over _all_ of the provided list. It'll iterate over at most one element (or none if the list should have none). As with moving from `subtractOne` to `foldNat` we'll need to introduce some recursion.

```haskell
foldr :: (a -> c -> c) -> c -> List a -> c
foldr f c (List l) =
  l c (\a as -> f a (foldr f c as))
```

With `foldr` we have enough to start using `List`s.

```
$ ghci lib/HotAir/List.hs

> import GHC.Num ((+))
> foldr (+) 0 (cons 1 (cons 1 nil))
2
```

We also have enough to write conversions between the builtin string type and our `HotAir` string type.

```haskell
import qualified Data.List as Builtin
import qualified Data.String as Builtin

import HotAir.Char (Char)
import qualified HotAir.Char as Char
import HotAir.List (cons, foldr, nil)

toBuiltin :: String -> Builtin.String
toBuiltin (String chars) =
  foldr ((:) . Char.toBuiltin) [] chars

fromBuiltin :: Builtin.String -> String
fromBuiltin =
  String
    . Builtin.foldr (cons . Char.fromBuiltin) nil
```

Which means that we can write `Show` and `IsString` instances.

```haskell
import qualified Data.String as Builtin
import qualified Text.Show as Builtin

instance Builtin.IsString String where
  fromString = fromBuiltin

instance Builtin.Show String where
  show = Builtin.show . toBuiltin
```

Which means we're able to easily create and view values of our `String` type in GHCi.

```
$ ghci lib/HotAir/String.hs

> "Hello, Hot Air!" :: HotAir.String.String
"Hello, Hot Air!"
```

However at this point you might be wondering if we've really achieved anything at all. It took us a while to get here but and so far it seems that all we're going to do is convert between ordinary Haskell types and Scott encoded types. Fortunately we've done as much of that we we'll need to do. We can write a `Show` type class that works in terms of _our_ `String`.

```haskell
{-# LANGUAGE NoImplicitPrelude #-}
{-# LANGUAGE OverloadedStrings #-}

module HotAir.Show
  ( Show(show)
  ) where

import HotAir.String (String)

class Show a where
  show :: a -> String
```

Now we can write instances of that type class for any further types we write. The only things we'll need to convert to their built in counterparts should be `Num`, `Char` and `String`.
